Official Journal of the European Communities

21 . 4. 93

No L 95/29

II

(Acts whose publication is not obligatory)

COUNCIL

COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 93/ 13/EEC

of 5 April 1993
on unfair terms in consumer contracts

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES,

Whereas it is the responsibility of the Member States to
ensure that contracts concluded with consumers do not

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European
Economic Community, and in particular Article 100 A

contain unfair terms ;

thereof,

Whereas, generally speaking, consumers do not know the
Having regard to the proposal from the Commission ('),

In cooperation with the European Parliament ^),

rules of law which, in Member States other than their

own, govern contracts for the sale of goods or services ;
whereas this lack of awareness may deter them from
direct transactions for the purchase of goods or services in
another Member State :

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social
Committee (3),

whereas, in order to facilitate the establishment of the

Whereas it is necessary to adopt measures with the aim of
progressively establishing the internal market before

internal market and to safeguard the citizen in his role as
consumer when acquiring goods and services under
contracts which are governed by the laws of Member

31

December

1992 ; whereas

the

internal

market

comprises an area without internal frontiers in which
goods, persons, services and capital move freely ;

Whereas the laws of Member States relating to the terms
of contract between the seller of goods or supplier of
services, on the one hand, and the consumer of them, on

the other hand, show many disparities, with the result that
the national markets for the sale of goods and services to
consumers differ from each other and that distortions of

States other than his own, it is essential to remove unfair
terms from those contracts ;

Whereas sellers of goods and suppliers of services will
thereby be helped in their task of selling goods and
supplying services, both at home and throughout the
internal market ; whereas competition will thus be stimu­
lated, so contributing to increased choice for Community
citizens as consumers ;

competition may arise amongst the sellers and suppliers,
notably when they sell and supply in other Member
States ;

Whereas, in particular, the laws of Member States relating
to unfair terms in consumer contracts show marked diver­
gences ;

(l) OJ No C 73, 24. 3. 1992, p. 7.
0 OJ No C 326, 16. 12. 1991 , p. 108 and
OJ No C 21 , 25. 1 . 1993.
(J) OJ No C 159, 17. 6. 1991 , p. 34.

Whereas the two Community programmes for a
consumer protection and information policy (4) under­
lined the importance of safeguarding consumers in the
matter of unfair terms of contract ; whereas this protec­
tion ought to be provided by laws and regulations which
are either harmonized at Community level or adopted
directly at that level ;
0 OJ No C 92, 25. 4. 1975, p. 1 and
OJ No C 133, 3. 6. 1981 , p. 1 .

No L 95/30

Official Journal of the European Communities

Whereas in accordance with the principle laid down
under the heading 'Protection of the economic interests
of the consumers', as stated in those programmes : 'acqui­
rers of goods and services should be protected against the
abuse of power by the seller or supplier, in particular
against one-sided standard contracts and the unfair exclu­

21 . 4. 93

sale or supply activities of a public nature providing
collective services which take account of solidarity among
users, must be supplemented by a means of making an
overall evaluation of the different interests involved ;

Whereas more effective protection of the consumer can
be achieved by adopting uniform rules of law in the
matter of unfair terms ; whereas those rules should apply
to all contracts concluded between sellers or suppliers and

whereas this constitutes the requirement of good faith ;
whereas, in making an assessment of good faith, particular
regard shall be had to the strength of the bargaining posi­
tions of the parties, whether the consumer had an induce­
ment to agree to the term and whether the goods or
services were sold or supplied to the special order of the
consumer ; whereas the requirement of good faith may be
satisfied by the seller or supplier where he deals fairly and
equitably with the other party whose legitimate interests

consumers ; whereas as a result inter alia contracts rela­

he has to take into account ;

ting to employment, contracts relating to succession
rights, contracts relating to rights under family law and
contracts relating to the incorporation and organization of
companies or partnership agreements must be excluded

Whereas, for the purposes of this Directive, the annexed
list of terms can be of indicative value only and, because

from this Directive ;

of the cause of the minimal character of the Directive, the

sion of essential rights in contracts' ;

scope of these terms may be the subject of amplification
or more restrictive editing by the Member States in their
Whereas the consumer must receive equal protection
under contracts concluded by word of mouth and written
contracts regardless, in the latter case, of whether the

national laws ;

terms of the contract are contained in one or more docu­

Whereas the nature of goods or services should have an
influence on assessing the unfairness of contractual

ments ;

terms ;

Whereas, however, as they now stand, national laws allow
only partial harmonization to be envisaged ; whereas, in
particular, only contractual terms which have not been
individually negotiated are covered by this Directive ;
whereas Member States should have the option, with due
regard for the Treaty, to afford consumers a higher level
of protection through national provisions that are more
stringent than those of this Directive ;

Whereas, for the purposes of this Directive, assessment of
unfair character shall not be made of terms which

describe the main subject matter of the contract nor the
quality/price ratio of the goods or services supplied ;
whereas the main subject matter of the contract and the
price/quality ratio may nevertheless be taken into account
in assessing the fairness of other terms ; whereas it
follows, inter alia, that in insurance contracts, the terms

Whereas the statutory or regulatory provisions of the
Member States which directly or indirectly determine the
terms of consumer contracts are presumed not to contain
unfair terms ; whereas, therefore, it does not appear to be
necessary to subject the terms which reflect mandatory

statutory or regulatory provisions and the principles or
provisions of international conventions to which the
Member States or the Community are party ; whereas in
that respect the wording 'mandatory statutory or regula­

tory provisions' in Article 1 (2) also covers rules which,

which clearly define or circumscribe the insured risk and
the insurer's liability shall not be subject to such assess­
ment since these restrictions are taken into account in

calculating the premium paid by the consumer ;

Whereas contracts should be drafted in plain, intelligible
language, the consumer should actually be given an
opportunity to examine all the terms and, if in doubt, the
interpretation most favourable to the consumer should
prevail ;

according to the law, shall apply between the contracting
parties provided that no other arrangements have been
established ;
Whereas Member States must however ensure that unfair

terms are not included, particularly because this Directive
also applies to trades, business or professions of a public
nature ;

Whereas it is necessary to fix in a general way the criteria
for assessing the unfair character of contract terms ;
Whereas the assessment, according to the general criteria
chosen, of the unfair character of terms, in particular in

Whereas Member States should ensure that unfair terms

are not used in contracts concluded with consumers by a
seller or supplier and that if, nevertheless, such terms are
so used, they will not bind the consumer, and the contract
will continue to bind the parties upon those terms if it is
capable of continuing in existence without the unfair
provisions ;
Whereas there is a risk that, in certain cases, the

consumer may be deprived of protection under this
Directive by designating the law of a non-Member
country as the law applicable to the contract ; whereas
provisions should therefore be included in this Directive
designed to avert this risk ;

Official Journal of the European Communities

21 . 4. 93

Whereas persons or organizations, if regarded under the
law of a Member State as having a legitimate interest in
the matter, must have facilities for initiating proceedings
concerning terms of contract drawn up for general use in
contracts concluded with consumers, and in particular
unfair terms, either before a court or before an adminis­

No L 95/31

consumer has therefore not been able to influence the

substance of the term, particularly in the context of a
pre-formulated standard contract.

The fact that certain aspects of a term or one specific
term have been individually negotiated shall not exclude

trative authority competent to decide upon complaints or
to initiate appropriate legal proceedings ; whereas this
possibility does not, however, entail prior verification of
the general conditions obtaining in individual economic

the application of this Article to the rest of a contract if

sectors ;

Whereas the courts or administrative authorities of the

Where any seller or supplier claims that a standard term
has been individually negotiated, the burden of proof in
this respect shall be incumbent on him.

Member States must have at their disposal adequate and
effective means of preventing the continued application

3.

of unfair terms in consumer contracts,

haustive list of the terms which may be regarded as unfair.

an overall assessment of the contract indicates that it is

nevertheless a pre-formulated standard contract.

The Annex shall contain an indicative and non-ex­

Article 4
HAS ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE :

Article 1

1 . The purpose of this Directive is to approximate the
laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the
Member States relating to unfair terms in contracts
concluded between a seller or supplier and a consumer.
2. The contractual terms which reflect mandatory
statutory or regulatory provisions and the provisions or
principles of international conventions to which the
Member States or the Community are party, particularly
in the transport area, shall not be subject to the provisions
of this Directive.

1 . Without prejudice to Article 7, the unfairness of a
contractual term shall be assessed, taking into account the
nature of the goods or services for which the contract was
concluded and by referring, at the time of conclusion of
the contract, to all the circumstances attending the
conclusion of the contract and to all the other terms of

the contract or of another contract on which it is depen­
dent.

2.

Assessment of the unfair nature of the terms shall

relate neither to the definition of the main subject matter
of the contract nor to the adequacy of the price and
remuneration, on the one hand, as against the services or
goods supplies in exchange, on the other, in so far as
these terms are in plain intelligible language.
Article 5

Article 2

For the purposes of this Directive :

(a) 'unfair terms' means the contractual terms defined in
Article 3 ;

(b) 'consumer means any natural person who, in
contracts covered by this Directive, is acting for
purposes which are outside his trade, business or
profession ;
(c) 'seller or supplier means any natural or legal person
who, in contracts covered by this Directive, is acting

for purposes relating to his trade, business or profes­

sion, whether publicly owned or privately owned.
Article 3

1 . A contractual term which has not been individually
negotiated shall be regarded as unfair if, contrary to the
requirement of good faith, it causes a significant

imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations arising
under the contract, to the detriment of the consumer.

2.

A term shall always be regarded as not individually

negotiated where it has been drafted in advance and the

In the case of contracts where all or certain terms offered

to the consumer are in writing, these terms must always
be drafted in plain, intelligible language. Where there is
doubt about the meaning of a term, the interpretation
most favourable to the consumer shall prevail. This rule
on interpretation shall not apply in the context of the
procedures laid down in Article 7 (2).
Article 6

1 . Member States shall lay down that unfair terms used
in a contract concluded with a consumer by a seller or
supplier shall, as provided for under their national law,
not be binding on the consumer and that the contract
shall continue to bind the parties upon those terms if it is
capable of continuing in existence without the unfair
terms.

2. Member States shall take the necessary measures to
ensure that the consumer does not lose the protection
granted by this Directive by virtue of the choice of the
law of a non-Member country as the law applicable to the
contract if the latter has a close connection with the

territory of the Member States.

Official Journal of the European Communities

No L 95/32
Article 7

1.

Member States shall ensure that, in the interests of

consumers and of competitors, adequate and effective
means exist to prevent the continued use of unfair terms
in contracts concluded with consumers by sellers or
suppliers.
2. The means referred to in paragraph 1 shall include
provisions whereby persons or organizations, having a
legitimate interest under national law in protecting
consumers, may take action according to the national law
concerned before the courts or before competent adminis­
trative bodies for a decision as to whether contractual

terms drawn up for general use are unfair, so that they can
apply appropriate and effective means to prevent the
continued use of such terms.

3. With due regard for national laws, the legal remedies
referred to in paragraph 2 may be directed separately or
jointly against a number of sellers or suppliers from the
same economic sector or their associations which use or

recommend the use of the same general contractual terms

21 . 4. 93

of this Directive five years at the latest after the date in
Article 10 (1 ).
Article 10

1 . Member States shall bring into force the laws, regu­
lations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
with this Directive no later than 31 December 1994. They
shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.

These provisions shall be applicable to all contracts
concluded after 31 December 1994.

2.

When Member States adopt these measures, they

shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be

accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their
official publication. The methods of making such a
reference shall be laid down by the Member States.

3. Member States shall communicate the main pro­
visions of national law which they adopt in the field
covered by this Directive to the Commission.

or similar terms.

Article 11
Article 8
This Directive is addressed to the Member States .

Member States may adopt or retain the most stringent
provisions compatible with the Treaty in the area covered
by this Directive, to ensure a maximum degree of protec­
tion for the consumer.

Article 9

The Commission shall present a report to the European
Parliament and to the Council concerning the application

Done at Luxembourg, 5 April 1993.
For the Council

The President
N. HELVEG PETERSEN

Official Journal of the European Communities

21 . 4. 93

ANNEX

TERMS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 3 (3)

1 . Terms which have the object or effect of :

(a) excluding or limiting the legal liability of a seller or supplier in the event of the death of a consumer
or personal injury to the latter resulting from an act or omission of that seller or supplier ;
(b) inappropriately excluding or limiting the legal rights of the consumer vis-d-vis the seller or supplier
or another party in the event of total or partial non-performance or inadequate performance by the
seller or supplier of any of the contractual obligations, including the option of offsetting a debt owed
to the seller or supplier against any claim which the consumer may have against him ;
(c) making an agreement binding on the consumer whereas provision of services by the seller or supplier
is subject to a condition whose realization depends on his own will alone ;
(d) permitting the seller or supplier to retain sums paid by the consumer where the latter decides not to
conclude or perform the contract, without providing for the consumer to receive compensation of an
equivalent amount from the seller or supplier where the latter is the party cancelling the contract ;

(e) requiring any consumer who fails to fulfil his obligation to pay a disproportionately high sum in
compensation ;

(f) authorizing the seller or supplier to dissolve the contract on a discretionary basis where the same faci­
lity is not granted to the consumer, or permitting the seller or supplier to retain the sums paid for
services not yet supplied by him where it is the seller or supplier himself who dissolves the contract ;
(g) enabling the seller or supplier to terminate a contract of indeterminate duration without reasonable
notice except where there are serious grounds for doing so ;
(h) automatically extending a contract of fixed duration where the consumer does not indicate otherwise,
when the deadline fixed for the consumer to express this desire not to extend the contract is
unreasonably early ;

(i) irrevocably binding the consumer to terms with which he had no real opportunity of becoming acqua­
inted before the conclusion of the contract ;

(j) enabling the seller or supplier to alter the terms of the contract unilaterally without a valid reason
which is specified in the contract ;

(k) enabling the seller or supplier to alter unilaterally without a valid reason any characteristics of the
product or service to be provided ;

(1) providing for the price of goods to be determined at the time of delivery or allowing a seller of goods
or supplier of services to increase their price without in both cases giving the consumer the
corresponding right to cancel the contract if the final price is too high in relation to the price agreed
when the contract was concluded ;

(m) giving the seller or supplier the right to determine whether the goods or services supplied are in
conformity with the contract, or giving him the exclusive right to interpret any term of the contract ;

(n) limiting the seller's or supplier's obligation to respect commitments undertaken by his agents or
making his commitments subject to compliance with a particular formality ;

(o) obliging the consumer to fulfil all his obligations where the seller or supplier does not perform his ;

(p) giving the seller or supplier the possibility of transferring his rights and obligations under the contract,
where this may serve to reduce the guarantees for the consumer, without the latter s agreement ;
(q) excluding or hindering the consumer s right to take legal action or exercise any other legal remedy,
particularly by requiring the consumer to take disputes exclusively to arbitration not covered by legal
provisions, unduly restricting the evidence available to him or imposing on him a burden of proof
which, according to the applicable law, should lie with another party to the contract.
2. Scope of subparagraphs (g), (j) and (1)

(a) Subparagraph (g) is without hindrance to terms by which a supplier of financial services reserves the
right to terminate unilaterally a contract of indeterminate duration without notice where there is a

valid reason, provided that the supplier is required to inform the other contracting party or parties
thereof immediately.

No L 95/33

No L 95/34

Official Journal of the European Communities
(b) Subparagraph (j) is without hindrance to terms under which a supplier of financial services reserves the
right to alter the rate of interest payable by the consumer or due to the latter, or the amount of other
charges for financial services without notice where there is a valid reason, provided that the supplier is
required to inform the other contracting party or parties thereof at the earliest opportunity and that
the latter are free to dissolve the contract immediately.

Subparagraph (j) is also without hindrance to terms under which a seller or supplier reserves the right
to alter unilaterally the conditions of a contract of indeterminate duration, provided that he is required
to inform the consumer with reasonable notice and that the consumer is free to dissolve the contract.

(c) Subparagraphs (g), (j) and (1) do not apply to :
— transactions in transferable securities, financial instruments and other products or services where
the price is linked to fluctuations in a stock exchange quotation or index or a financial market rate
that the seller or supplier does not control ;
— contracts for the purchase or sale of foreign currency, traveller's cheques or international money
orders denominated in foreign currency ;
(d) Subparagraph (1) is without hindrance to price-indexation clauses, where lawful, provided that the
method by which prices vary is explicitly described.

21 . 4. 93

