5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/19
REGULATION (EU) 2015/848 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 20 May 2015
on insolvency proceedings
(recast)
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 81 thereof,
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee (1),
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2),
Whereas:
(1)On 12 December 2012, the Commission adopted a report on the application of Council Regulation (EC)
No 1346/2000 (3). The report concluded that the Regulation is functioning well in general but that it would be
desirable to improve the application of certain of its provisions in order to enhance the effective administration
of cross-border insolvency proceedings. Since that Regulation has been amended several times and further
amendments are to be made, it should be recast in the interest of clarity.
(2)The Union has set the objective of establishing an area of freedom, security and justice.
(3)The proper functioning of the internal market requires that cross-border insolvency proceedings should operate
efficiently and effectively. This Regulation needs to be adopted in order to achieve that objective, which falls
within the scope of judicial cooperation in civil matters within the meaning of Article 81 of the Treaty.
(4)The activities of undertakings have more and more cross-border effects and are therefore increasingly being
regulated by Union law. The insolvency of such undertakings also affects the proper functioning of the internal
market, and there is a need for a Union act requiring coordination of the measures to be taken regarding an
insolvent debtor's assets.
(5)It is necessary for the proper functioning of the internal market to avoid incentives for parties to transfer assets
or judicial proceedings from one Member State to another, seeking to obtain a more favourable legal position to
the detriment of the general body of creditors (forum shopping).
(6)This Regulation should include provisions governing jurisdiction for opening insolvency proceedings and actions
which are directly derived from insolvency proceedings and are closely linked with them. This Regulation should
also contain provisions regarding the recognition and enforcement of judgments issued in such proceedings, and
provisions regarding the law applicable to insolvency proceedings. In addition, this Regulation should lay down
rules on the coordination of insolvency proceedings which relate to the same debtor or to several members of
the same group of companies.
(7)Bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial
arrangements, compositions and analogous proceedings and actions related to such proceedings are excluded
from the scope of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4). Those
proceedings should be covered by this Regulation. The interpretation of this Regulation should as much as
possible avoid regulatory loopholes between the two instruments. However, the mere fact that a national
procedure is not listed in Annex A to this Regulation should not imply that it is covered by Regulation (EU)
No 1215/2012.
(1) OJ C 271, 19.9.2013, p. 55.
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 5 February 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and position of the Council at first
reading of 12 March 2015 (not yet published in the Official Journal). Position of the European Parliament of 20 May 2015 (not yet
published in the Official Journal).
(3) Council Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000 of 29 May 2000 on insolvency proceedings (OJ L 160, 30.6.2000, p. 1).
(4) Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the
recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1).L 141/20
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(8)In order to achieve the aim of improving the efficiency and effectiveness of insolvency proceedings having cross-
border effects, it is necessary, and appropriate, that the provisions on jurisdiction, recognition and applicable law
in this area should be contained in a Union measure which is binding and directly applicable in Member States.
(9)This Regulation should apply to insolvency proceedings which meet the conditions set out in it, irrespective of
whether the debtor is a natural person or a legal person, a trader or an individual. Those insolvency proceedings
are listed exhaustively in Annex A. In respect of the national procedures contained in Annex A, this Regulation
should apply without any further examination by the courts of another Member State as to whether the
conditions set out in this Regulation are met. National insolvency procedures not listed in Annex A should not
be covered by this Regulation.
(10)The scope of this Regulation should extend to proceedings which promote the rescue of economically viable but
distressed businesses and which give a second chance to entrepreneurs. It should, in particular, extend to
proceedings which provide for restructuring of a debtor at a stage where there is only a likelihood of insolvency,
and to proceedings which leave the debtor fully or partially in control of its assets and affairs. It should also
extend to proceedings providing for a debt discharge or a debt adjustment in relation to consumers and self-
employed persons, for example by reducing the amount to be paid by the debtor or by extending the payment
period granted to the debtor. Since such proceedings do not necessarily entail the appointment of an insolvency
practitioner, they should be covered by this Regulation if they take place under the control or supervision of a
court. In this context, the term ‘control’ should include situations where the court only intervenes on appeal by a
creditor or other interested parties.
(11)This Regulation should also apply to procedures which grant a temporary stay on enforcement actions brought
by individual creditors where such actions could adversely affect negotiations and hamper the prospects of a
restructuring of the debtor's business. Such procedures should not be detrimental to the general body of creditors
and, if no agreement on a restructuring plan can be reached, should be preliminary to other procedures covered
by this Regulation.
(12)This Regulation should apply to proceedings the opening of which is subject to publicity in order to allow
creditors to become aware of the proceedings and to lodge their claims, thereby ensuring the collective nature of
the proceedings, and in order to give creditors the opportunity to challenge the jurisdiction of the court which
has opened the proceedings.
(13)Accordingly, insolvency proceedings which are confidential should be excluded from the scope of this Regulation.
While such proceedings may play an important role in some Member States, their confidential nature makes it
impossible for a creditor or a court located in another Member State to know that such proceedings have been
opened, thereby making it difficult to provide for the recognition of their effects throughout the Union.
(14)The collective proceedings which are covered by this Regulation should include all or a significant part of the
creditors to whom a debtor owes all or a substantial proportion of the debtor's outstanding debts provided that
the claims of those creditors who are not involved in such proceedings remain unaffected. Proceedings which
involve only the financial creditors of a debtor should also be covered. Proceedings which do not include all the
creditors of a debtor should be proceedings aimed at rescuing the debtor. Proceedings that lead to a definitive
cessation of the debtor's activities or the liquidation of the debtor's assets should include all the debtor's creditors.
Moreover, the fact that some insolvency proceedings for natural persons exclude specific categories of claims,
such as maintenance claims, from the possibility of a debt-discharge should not mean that such proceedings are
not collective.
(15)This Regulation should also apply to proceedings that, under the law of some Member States, are opened and
conducted for a certain period of time on an interim or provisional basis before a court issues an order
confirming the continuation of the proceedings on a non-interim basis. Although labelled as ‘interim’, such
proceedings should meet all other requirements of this Regulation.
(16)This Regulation should apply to proceedings which are based on laws relating to insolvency. However,
proceedings that are based on general company law not designed exclusively for insolvency situations should not
be considered to be based on laws relating to insolvency. Similarly, the purpose of adjustment of debt should not
include specific proceedings in which debts of a natural person of very low income and very low asset value are
written off, provided that this type of proceedings never makes provision for payment to creditors.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/21
(17)This Regulation's scope should extend to proceedings which are triggered by situations in which the debtor faces
non-financial difficulties, provided that such difficulties give rise to a real and serious threat to the debtor's actual
or future ability to pay its debts as they fall due. The time frame relevant for the determination of such threat
may extend to a period of several months or even longer in order to account for cases in which the debtor is
faced with non-financial difficulties threatening the status of its business as a going concern and, in the medium
term, its liquidity. This may be the case, for example, where the debtor has lost a contract which is of key
importance to it.
(18)This Regulation should be without prejudice to the rules on the recovery of State aid from insolvent companies
as interpreted by the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
(19)Insolvency proceedings concerning insurance undertakings, credit institutions, investment firms and other firms,
institutions or undertakings covered by Directive 2001/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (1)
and collective investment undertakings should be excluded from the scope of this Regulation, as they are all
subject to special arrangements and the national supervisory authorities have wide-ranging powers of
intervention.
(20)Insolvency proceedings do not necessarily involve the intervention of a judicial authority. Therefore, the term
‘court’ in this Regulation should, in certain provisions, be given a broad meaning and include a person or body
empowered by national law to open insolvency proceedings. In order for this Regulation to apply, proceedings
(comprising acts and formalities set down in law) should not only have to comply with the provisions of this
Regulation, but they should also be officially recognised and legally effective in the Member State in which the
insolvency proceedings are opened.
(21)Insolvency practitioners are defined in this Regulation and listed in Annex B. Insolvency practitioners who are
appointed without the involvement of a judicial body should, under national law, be appropriately regulated and
authorised to act in insolvency proceedings. The national regulatory framework should provide for proper
arrangements to deal with potential conflicts of interest.
(22)This Regulation acknowledges the fact that as a result of widely differing substantive laws it is not practical to
introduce insolvency proceedings with universal scope throughout the Union. The application without exception
of the law of the State of the opening of proceedings would, against this background, frequently lead to
difficulties. This applies, for example, to the widely differing national laws on security interests to be found in the
Member States. Furthermore, the preferential rights enjoyed by some creditors in insolvency proceedings are, in
some cases, completely different. At the next review of this Regulation, it will be necessary to identify further
measures in order to improve the preferential rights of employees at European level. This Regulation should take
account of such differing national laws in two different ways. On the one hand, provision should be made for
special rules on the applicable law in the case of particularly significant rights and legal relationships (e.g. rights
in rem and contracts of employment). On the other hand, national proceedings covering only assets situated in
the State of the opening of proceedings should also be allowed alongside main insolvency proceedings with
universal scope.
(23)This Regulation enables the main insolvency proceedings to be opened in the Member State where the debtor has
the centre of its main interests. Those proceedings have universal scope and are aimed at encompassing all the
debtor's assets. To protect the diversity of interests, this Regulation permits secondary insolvency proceedings to
be opened to run in parallel with the main insolvency proceedings. Secondary insolvency proceedings may be
opened in the Member State where the debtor has an establishment. The effects of secondary insolvency
proceedings are limited to the assets located in that State. Mandatory rules of coordination with the main
insolvency proceedings satisfy the need for unity in the Union.
(24)Where main insolvency proceedings concerning a legal person or company have been opened in a Member State
other than that of its registered office, it should be possible to open secondary insolvency proceedings in the
Member State of the registered office, provided that the debtor is carrying out an economic activity with human
means and assets in that State, in accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
(25)This Regulation applies only to proceedings in respect of a debtor whose centre of main interests is located in the
Union.
(1) Directive 2001/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the reorganisation and winding-up of credit
institutions (OJ L 125, 5.5.2001, p. 15).L 141/22
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(26)The rules of jurisdiction set out in this Regulation establish only international jurisdiction, that is to say, they
designate the Member State the courts of which may open insolvency proceedings. Territorial jurisdiction within
that Member State should be established by the national law of the Member State concerned.
(27)Before opening insolvency proceedings, the competent court should examine of its own motion whether the
centre of the debtor's main interests or the debtor's establishment is actually located within its jurisdiction.
(28)When determining whether the centre of the debtor's main interests is ascertainable by third parties, special
consideration should be given to the creditors and to their perception as to where a debtor conducts the adminis­
tration of its interests. This may require, in the event of a shift of centre of main interests, informing creditors of
the new location from which the debtor is carrying out its activities in due course, for example by drawing
attention to the change of address in commercial correspondence, or by making the new location public through
other appropriate means.
(29)This Regulation should contain a number of safeguards aimed at preventing fraudulent or abusive forum
shopping.
(30)Accordingly, the presumptions that the registered office, the principal place of business and the habitual residence
are the centre of main interests should be rebuttable, and the relevant court of a Member State should carefully
assess whether the centre of the debtor's main interests is genuinely located in that Member State. In the case of a
company, it should be possible to rebut this presumption where the company's central administration is located
in a Member State other than that of its registered office, and where a comprehensive assessment of all the
relevant factors establishes, in a manner that is ascertainable by third parties, that the company's actual centre of
management and supervision and of the management of its interests is located in that other Member State. In the
case of an individual not exercising an independent business or professional activity, it should be possible to
rebut this presumption, for example where the major part of the debtor's assets is located outside the Member
State of the debtor's habitual residence, or where it can be established that the principal reason for moving was
to file for insolvency proceedings in the new jurisdiction and where such filing would materially impair the
interests of creditors whose dealings with the debtor took place prior to the relocation.
(31)With the same objective of preventing fraudulent or abusive forum shopping, the presumption that the centre of
main interests is at the place of the registered office, at the individual's principal place of business or at the
individual's habitual residence should not apply where, respectively, in the case of a company, legal person or
individual exercising an independent business or professional activity, the debtor has relocated its registered office
or principal place of business to another Member State within the 3-month period prior to the request for
opening insolvency proceedings, or, in the case of an individual not exercising an independent business or
professional activity, the debtor has relocated his habitual residence to another Member State within the 6-month
period prior to the request for opening insolvency proceedings.
(32)In all cases, where the circumstances of the matter give rise to doubts about the court's jurisdiction, the court
should require the debtor to submit additional evidence to support its assertions and, where the law applicable to
the insolvency proceedings so allows, give the debtor's creditors the opportunity to present their views on the
question of jurisdiction.
(33)In the event that the court seised of the request to open insolvency proceedings finds that the centre of main
interests is not located on its territory, it should not open main insolvency proceedings.
(34)In addition, any creditor of the debtor should have an effective remedy against the decision to open insolvency
proceedings. The consequences of any challenge to the decision to open insolvency proceedings should be
governed by national law.
(35)The courts of the Member State within the territory of which insolvency proceedings have been opened should
also have jurisdiction for actions which derive directly from the insolvency proceedings and are closely linked
with them. Such actions should include avoidance actions against defendants in other Member States and actions
concerning obligations that arise in the course of the insolvency proceedings, such as advance payment for costs
of the proceedings. In contrast, actions for the performance of the obligations under a contract concluded by the
debtor prior to the opening of proceedings do not derive directly from the proceedings. Where such an action is
related to another action based on general civil and commercial law, the insolvency practitioner should be able to5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/23
bring both actions in the courts of the defendant's domicile if he considers it more efficient to bring the action in
that forum. This could, for example, be the case where the insolvency practitioner wishes to combine an action
for director's liability on the basis of insolvency law with an action based on company law or general tort law.
(36)The court having jurisdiction to open the main insolvency proceedings should be able to order provisional and
protective measures as from the time of the request to open proceedings. Preservation measures both prior to
and after the commencement of the insolvency proceedings are important to guarantee the effectiveness of the
insolvency proceedings. In that connection, this Regulation should provide for various possibilities. On the one
hand, the court competent for the main insolvency proceedings should also be able to order provisional and
protective measures covering assets situated in the territory of other Member States. On the other hand, an
insolvency practitioner temporarily appointed prior to the opening of the main insolvency proceedings should be
able, in the Member States in which an establishment belonging to the debtor is to be found, to apply for the
preservation measures which are possible under the law of those Member States.
(37)Prior to the opening of the main insolvency proceedings, the right to request the opening of insolvency
proceedings in the Member State where the debtor has an establishment should be limited to local creditors and
public authorities, or to cases in which main insolvency proceedings cannot be opened under the law of the
Member State where the debtor has the centre of its main interests. The reason for this restriction is that cases in
which territorial insolvency proceedings are requested before the main insolvency proceedings are intended to be
limited to what is absolutely necessary.
(38)Following the opening of the main insolvency proceedings, this Regulation does not restrict the right to request
the opening of insolvency proceedings in a Member State where the debtor has an establishment. The insolvency
practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings or any other person empowered under the national law of that
Member State may request the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings.
(39)This Regulation should provide for rules to determine the location of the debtor's assets, which should apply
when determining which assets belong to the main or secondary insolvency proceedings, or to situations
involving third parties' rights in rem. In particular, this Regulation should provide that European patents with
unitary effect, a Community trade mark or any other similar rights, such as Community plant variety rights or
Community designs, should only be included in the main insolvency proceedings.
(40)Secondary insolvency proceedings can serve different purposes, besides the protection of local interests. Cases
may arise in which the insolvency estate of the debtor is too complex to administer as a unit, or the differences
in the legal systems concerned are so great that difficulties may arise from the extension of effects deriving from
the law of the State of the opening of proceedings to the other Member States where the assets are located. For
that reason, the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings may request the opening of
secondary insolvency proceedings where the efficient administration of the insolvency estate so requires.
(41)Secondary insolvency proceedings may also hamper the efficient administration of the insolvency estate.
Therefore, this Regulation sets out two specific situations in which the court seised of a request to open
secondary insolvency proceedings should be able, at the request of the insolvency practitioner in the main
insolvency proceedings, to postpone or refuse the opening of such proceedings.
(42)First, this Regulation confers on the insolvency practitioner in main insolvency proceedings the possibility of
giving an undertaking to local creditors that they will be treated as if secondary insolvency proceedings had been
opened. That undertaking has to meet a number of conditions set out in this Regulation, in particular that it be
approved by a qualified majority of local creditors. Where such an undertaking has been given, the court seised
of a request to open secondary insolvency proceedings should be able to refuse that request if it is satisfied that
the undertaking adequately protects the general interests of local creditors. When assessing those interests, the
court should take into account the fact that the undertaking has been approved by a qualified majority of local
creditors.
(43)For the purposes of giving an undertaking to local creditors, the assets and rights located in the Member State
where the debtor has an establishment should form a sub-category of the insolvency estate, and, when
distributing them or the proceeds resulting from their realisation, the insolvency practitioner in the main
insolvency proceedings should respect the priority rights that creditors would have had if secondary insolvency
proceedings had been opened in that Member State.L 141/24
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(44)National law should be applicable, as appropriate, in relation to the approval of an undertaking. In particular,
where under national law the voting rules for adopting a restructuring plan require the prior approval of
creditors' claims, those claims should be deemed to be approved for the purpose of voting on the undertaking.
Where there are different procedures for the adoption of restructuring plans under national law, Member States
should designate the specific procedure which should be relevant in this context.
(45)Second, this Regulation should provide for the possibility that the court temporarily stays the opening of
secondary insolvency proceedings, when a temporary stay of individual enforcement proceedings has been
granted in the main insolvency proceedings, in order to preserve the efficiency of the stay granted in the main
insolvency proceedings. The court should be able to grant the temporary stay if it is satisfied that suitable
measures are in place to protect the general interest of local creditors. In such a case, all creditors that could be
affected by the outcome of the negotiations on a restructuring plan should be informed of the negotiations and
be allowed to participate in them.
(46)In order to ensure effective protection of local interests, the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency
proceedings should not be able to realise or re-locate, in an abusive manner, assets situated in the Member State
where an establishment is located, in particular, with the purpose of frustrating the possibility that such interests
can be effectively satisfied if secondary insolvency proceedings are opened subsequently.
(47)This Regulation should not prevent the courts of a Member State in which secondary insolvency proceedings
have been opened from sanctioning a debtor's directors for violation of their duties, provided that those courts
have jurisdiction to address such disputes under their national law.
(48)Main insolvency proceedings and secondary insolvency proceedings can contribute to the efficient administration
of the debtor's insolvency estate or to the effective realisation of the total assets if there is proper cooperation
between the actors involved in all the concurrent proceedings. Proper cooperation implies the various insolvency
practitioners and the courts involved cooperating closely, in particular by exchanging a sufficient amount of
information. In order to ensure the dominant role of the main insolvency proceedings, the insolvency
practitioner in such proceedings should be given several possibilities for intervening in secondary insolvency
proceedings which are pending at the same time. In particular, the insolvency practitioner should be able to
propose a restructuring plan or composition or apply for a suspension of the realisation of the assets in the
secondary insolvency proceedings. When cooperating, insolvency practitioners and courts should take into
account best practices for cooperation in cross-border insolvency cases, as set out in principles and guidelines on
communication and cooperation adopted by European and international organisations active in the area of
insolvency law, and in particular the relevant guidelines prepared by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (Uncitral).
(49)In light of such cooperation, insolvency practitioners and courts should be able to enter into agreements and
protocols for the purpose of facilitating cross-border cooperation of multiple insolvency proceedings in different
Member States concerning the same debtor or members of the same group of companies, where this is
compatible with the rules applicable to each of the proceedings. Such agreements and protocols may vary in
form, in that they may be written or oral, and in scope, in that they may range from generic to specific, and may
be entered into by different parties. Simple generic agreements may emphasise the need for close cooperation
between the parties, without addressing specific issues, while more detailed, specific agreements may establish a
framework of principles to govern multiple insolvency proceedings and may be approved by the courts involved,
where the national law so requires. They may reflect an agreement between the parties to take, or to refrain from
taking, certain steps or actions.
(50)Similarly, the courts of different Member States may cooperate by coordinating the appointment of insolvency
practitioners. In that context, they may appoint a single insolvency practitioner for several insolvency proceedings
concerning the same debtor or for different members of a group of companies, provided that this is compatible
with the rules applicable to each of the proceedings, in particular with any requirements concerning the qualifi­
cation and licensing of the insolvency practitioner.
(51)This Regulation should ensure the efficient administration of insolvency proceedings relating to different
companies forming part of a group of companies.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/25
(52)Where insolvency proceedings have been opened for several companies of the same group, there should be
proper cooperation between the actors involved in those proceedings. The various insolvency practitioners and
the courts involved should therefore be under a similar obligation to cooperate and communicate with each other
as those involved in main and secondary insolvency proceedings relating to the same debtor. Cooperation
between the insolvency practitioners should not run counter to the interests of the creditors in each of the
proceedings, and such cooperation should be aimed at finding a solution that would leverage synergies across the
group.
(53)The introduction of rules on the insolvency proceedings of groups of companies should not limit the possibility
for a court to open insolvency proceedings for several companies belonging to the same group in a single
jurisdiction if the court finds that the centre of main interests of those companies is located in a single Member
State. In such cases, the court should also be able to appoint, if appropriate, the same insolvency practitioner in
all proceedings concerned, provided that this is not incompatible with the rules applicable to them.
(54)With a view to further improving the coordination of the insolvency proceedings of members of a group of
companies, and to allow for a coordinated restructuring of the group, this Regulation should introduce
procedural rules on the coordination of the insolvency proceedings of members of a group of companies. Such
coordination should strive to ensure the efficiency of the coordination, whilst at the same time respecting each
group member's separate legal personality.
(55)An insolvency practitioner appointed in insolvency proceedings opened in relation to a member of a group of
companies should be able to request the opening of group coordination proceedings. However, where the law
applicable to the insolvency so requires, that insolvency practitioner should obtain the necessary authorisation
before making such a request. The request should specify the essential elements of the coordination, in particular
an outline of the coordination plan, a proposal as to whom should be appointed as coordinator and an outline of
the estimated costs of the coordination.
(56)In order to ensure the voluntary nature of group coordination proceedings, the insolvency practitioners involved
should be able to object to their participation in the proceedings within a specified time period. In order to allow
the insolvency practitioners involved to take an informed decision on participation in the group coordination
proceedings, they should be informed at an early stage of the essential elements of the coordination. However,
any insolvency practitioner who initially objects to inclusion in the group coordination proceedings should be
able to subsequently request to participate in them. In such a case, the coordinator should take a decision on the
admissibility of the request. All insolvency practitioners, including the requesting insolvency practitioner, should
be informed of the coordinator's decision and should have the opportunity of challenging that decision before
the court which has opened the group coordination proceedings.
(57)Group coordination proceedings should always strive to facilitate the effective administration of the insolvency
proceedings of the group members, and to have a generally positive impact for the creditors. This Regulation
should therefore ensure that the court with which a request for group coordination proceedings has been filed
makes an assessment of those criteria prior to opening group coordination proceedings.
(58)The advantages of group coordination proceedings should not be outweighed by the costs of those proceedings.
Therefore, it is necessary to ensure that the costs of the coordination, and the share of those costs that each
group member will bear, are adequate, proportionate and reasonable, and are determined in accordance with the
national law of the Member State in which group coordination proceedings have been opened. The insolvency
practitioners involved should also have the possibility of controlling those costs from an early stage of the
proceedings. Where the national law so requires, controlling costs from an early stage of proceedings could
involve the insolvency practitioner seeking the approval of a court or creditors' committee.
(59)Where the coordinator considers that the fulfilment of his or her tasks requires a significant increase in costs
compared to the initially estimated costs and, in any case, where the costs exceed 10 % of the estimated costs, the
coordinator should be authorised by the court which has opened the group coordination proceedings to exceed
such costs. Before taking its decision, the court which has opened the group coordination proceedings should
give the possibility to the participating insolvency practitioners to be heard before it in order to allow them to
communicate their observations on the appropriateness of the coordinator's request.L 141/26
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(60)For members of a group of companies which are not participating in group coordination proceedings, this
Regulation should also provide for an alternative mechanism to achieve a coordinated restructuring of the group.
An insolvency practitioner appointed in proceedings relating to a member of a group of companies should have
standing to request a stay of any measure related to the realisation of the assets in the proceedings opened with
respect to other members of the group which are not subject to group coordination proceedings. It should only
be possible to request such a stay if a restructuring plan is presented for the members of the group concerned, if
the plan is to the benefit of the creditors in the proceedings in respect of which the stay is requested, and if the
stay is necessary to ensure that the plan can be properly implemented.
(61)This Regulation should not prevent Member States from establishing national rules which would supplement the
rules on cooperation, communication and coordination with regard to the insolvency of members of groups of
companies set out in this Regulation, provided that the scope of application of those national rules is limited to
the national jurisdiction and that their application would not impair the efficiency of the rules laid down by this
Regulation.
(62)The rules on cooperation, communication and coordination in the framework of the insolvency of members of a
group of companies provided for in this Regulation should only apply to the extent that proceedings relating to
different members of the same group of companies have been opened in more than one Member State.
(63)Any creditor which has its habitual residence, domicile or registered office in the Union should have the right to
lodge its claims in each of the insolvency proceedings pending in the Union relating to the debtor's assets. This
should also apply to tax authorities and social insurance institutions. This Regulation should not prevent the
insolvency practitioner from lodging claims on behalf of certain groups of creditors, for example employees,
where the national law so provides. However, in order to ensure the equal treatment of creditors, the distribution
of proceeds should be coordinated. Every creditor should be able to keep what it has received in the course of
insolvency proceedings, but should be entitled only to participate in the distribution of total assets in other
proceedings if creditors with the same standing have obtained the same proportion of their claims.
(64)It is essential that creditors which have their habitual residence, domicile or registered office in the Union be
informed about the opening of insolvency proceedings relating to their debtor's assets. In order to ensure a swift
transmission of information to creditors, Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the
Council (1) should not apply where this Regulation refers to the obligation to inform creditors. The use of
standard forms available in all official languages of the institutions of the Union should facilitate the task of
creditors when lodging claims in proceedings opened in another Member State. The consequences of the
incomplete filing of the standard forms should be a matter for national law.
(65)This Regulation should provide for the immediate recognition of judgments concerning the opening, conduct and
closure of insolvency proceedings which fall within its scope, and of judgments handed down in direct
connection with such insolvency proceedings. Automatic recognition should therefore mean that the effects
attributed to the proceedings by the law of the Member State in which the proceedings were opened extend to all
other Member States. The recognition of judgments delivered by the courts of the Member States should be based
on the principle of mutual trust. To that end, grounds for non-recognition should be reduced to the minimum
necessary. This is also the basis on which any dispute should be resolved where the courts of two Member States
both claim competence to open the main insolvency proceedings. The decision of the first court to open
proceedings should be recognised in the other Member States without those Member States having the power to
scrutinise that court's decision.
(66)This Regulation should set out, for the matters covered by it, uniform rules on conflict of laws which replace,
within their scope of application, national rules of private international law. Unless otherwise stated, the law of
the Member State of the opening of proceedings should be applicable (lex concursus). This rule on conflict of laws
should be valid both for the main insolvency proceedings and for local proceedings. The lex concursus determines
all the effects of the insolvency proceedings, both procedural and substantive, on the persons and legal relations
concerned. It governs all the conditions for the opening, conduct and closure of the insolvency proceedings.
(67)Automatic recognition of insolvency proceedings to which the law of the State of the opening of proceedings
normally applies may interfere with the rules under which transactions are carried out in other Member States.
To protect legitimate expectations and the certainty of transactions in Member States other than that in which
proceedings are opened, provision should be made for a number of exceptions to the general rule.
(1) Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on the service in the Member
States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil and commercial matters (service of documents), and repealing Council Regulation
(EC) No 1348/2000 (OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 79).5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/27
(68)There is a particular need for a special reference diverging from the law of the opening State in the case of rights
in rem, since such rights are of considerable importance for the granting of credit. The basis, validity and extent
of rights in rem should therefore normally be determined according to the lex situs and not be affected by the
opening of insolvency proceedings. The proprietor of a right in rem should therefore be able to continue to assert
its right to segregation or separate settlement of the collateral security. Where assets are subject to rights in rem
under the lex situs in one Member State but the main insolvency proceedings are being carried out in another
Member State, the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings should be able to request the
opening of secondary insolvency proceedings in the jurisdiction where the rights in rem arise if the debtor has an
establishment there. If secondary insolvency proceedings are not opened, any surplus on the sale of an asset
covered by rights in rem should be paid to the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings.
(69)This Regulation lays down several provisions for a court to order a stay of opening proceedings or a stay of
enforcement proceedings. Any such stay should not affect the rights in rem of creditors or third parties.
(70)If a set-off of claims is not permitted under the law of the State of the opening of proceedings, a creditor should
nevertheless be entitled to the set-off if it is possible under the law applicable to the claim of the insolvent
debtor. In this way, set-off would acquire a kind of guarantee function based on legal provisions on which the
creditor concerned can rely at the time when the claim arises.
(71)There is also a need for special protection in the case of payment systems and financial markets, for example in
relation to the position-closing agreements and netting agreements to be found in such systems, as well as the
sale of securities and the guarantees provided for such transactions as governed in particular by Directive
98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (1). For such transactions, the only law which is relevant
should be that applicable to the system or market concerned. That law is intended to prevent the possibility of
mechanisms for the payment and settlement of transactions, and provided for in payment and set-off systems or
on the regulated financial markets of the Member States, being altered in the case of insolvency of a business
partner. Directive 98/26/EC contains special provisions which should take precedence over the general rules laid
down in this Regulation.
(72)In order to protect employees and jobs, the effects of insolvency proceedings on the continuation or termination
of employment and on the rights and obligations of all parties to such employment should be determined by the
law applicable to the relevant employment agreement, in accordance with the general rules on conflict of laws.
Moreover, in cases where the termination of employment contracts requires approval by a court or administrative
authority, the Member State in which an establishment of the debtor is located should retain jurisdiction to grant
such approval even if no insolvency proceedings have been opened in that Member State. Any other questions
relating to the law of insolvency, such as whether the employees' claims are protected by preferential rights and
the status such preferential rights may have, should be determined by the law of the Member State in which the
insolvency proceedings (main or secondary) have been opened, except in cases where an undertaking to avoid
secondary insolvency proceedings has been given in accordance with this Regulation.
(73)The law applicable to the effects of insolvency proceedings on any pending lawsuit or pending arbitral
proceedings concerning an asset or right which forms part of the debtor's insolvency estate should be the law of
the Member State where the lawsuit is pending or where the arbitration has its seat. However, this rule should
not affect national rules on recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards.
(74)In order to take account of the specific procedural rules of court systems in certain Member States flexibility
should be provided with regard to certain rules of this Regulation. Accordingly, references in this Regulation to
notice being given by a judicial body of a Member State should include, where a Member State's procedural rules
so require, an order by that judicial body directing that notice be given.
(75)For business considerations, the main content of the decision opening the proceedings should be published, at
the request of the insolvency practitioner, in a Member State other than that of the court which delivered that
decision. If there is an establishment in the Member State concerned, such publication should be mandatory. In
neither case, however, should publication be a prior condition for recognition of the foreign proceedings.
(1) Directive 98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality in payment and securities
settlement systems (OJ L 166, 11.6.1998, p. 45).L 141/28
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(76)In order to improve the provision of information to relevant creditors and courts and to prevent the opening of
parallel insolvency proceedings, Member States should be required to publish relevant information in cross-
border insolvency cases in a publicly accessible electronic register. In order to facilitate access to that information
for creditors and courts domiciled or located in other Member States, this Regulation should provide for the
interconnection of such insolvency registers via the European e-Justice Portal. Member States should be free to
publish relevant information in several registers and it should be possible to interconnect more than one register
per Member State.
(77)This Regulation should determine the minimum amount of information to be published in the insolvency
registers. Member States should not be precluded from including additional information. Where the debtor is an
individual, the insolvency registers should only have to indicate a registration number if the debtor is exercising
an independent business or professional activity. That registration number should be understood to be the unique
registration number of the debtor's independent business or professional activity published in the trade register,
if any.
(78)Information on certain aspects of insolvency proceedings is essential for creditors, such as time limits for lodging
claims or for challenging decisions. This Regulation should, however, not require Member States to calculate
those time-limits on a case-by-case basis. Member States should be able to fulfil their obligations by adding
hyperlinks to the European e-Justice Portal, where self-explanatory information on the criteria for calculating
those time-limits is to be provided.
(79)In order to grant sufficient protection to information relating to individuals not exercising an independent
business or professional activity, Member States should be able to make access to that information subject to
supplementary search criteria such as the debtor's personal identification number, address, date of birth or the
district of the competent court, or to make access conditional upon a request to a competent authority or upon
the verification of a legitimate interest.
(80)Member States should also be able not to include in their insolvency registers information on individuals not
exercising an independent business or professional activity. In such cases, Member States should ensure that the
relevant information is given to the creditors by individual notice, and that claims of creditors who have not
received the information are not affected by the proceedings.
(81)It may be the case that some of the persons concerned are not aware that insolvency proceedings have been
opened, and act in good faith in a way that conflicts with the new circumstances. In order to protect such
persons who, unaware that foreign proceedings have been opened, make a payment to the debtor instead of to
the foreign insolvency practitioner, provision should be made for such a payment to have a debt-discharging
effect.
(82)In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should
be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU)
No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (1).
(83)This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union. In particular, this Regulation seeks to promote the application of
Articles 8, 17 and 47 concerning, respectively, the protection of personal data, the right to property and the
right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial.
(84)Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (2) and Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the
European Parliament and of the Council (3) apply to the processing of personal data within the framework of this
Regulation.
(85)This Regulation is without prejudice to Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1182/71 of the Council (4).
(1) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general
principles concerning mechanisms for control by the Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers (OJ L 55,
28.2.2011, p. 13).
2
( ) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31).
(3) Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 8,
12.1.2001, p. 1).
(4) Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1182/71 of the Council of 3 June 1971 determining the rules applicable to periods, dates and time limits
(OJ L 124, 8.6.1971, p. 1).5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/29
(86)Since the objective of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by
reason of the creation of a legal framework for the proper administration of cross-border insolvency proceedings,
be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity
as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as
set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.
(87)In accordance with Article 3 and Article 4a(1) of Protocol No 21 on the position of the United Kingdom and
Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice, annexed to the Treaty on European Union and the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the United Kingdom and Ireland have notified their wish to
take part in the adoption and application of this Regulation.
(88)In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 22 on the position of Denmark annexed to the Treaty on
European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Denmark is not taking part in the
adoption of this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
(89)The European Data Protection Supervisor was consulted and delivered an opinion on 27 March 2013 (1),
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Scope
1.
This Regulation shall apply to public collective proceedings, including interim proceedings, which are based on
laws relating to insolvency and in which, for the purpose of rescue, adjustment of debt, reorganisation or liquidation:
(a) a debtor is totally or partially divested of its assets and an insolvency practitioner is appointed;
(b) the assets and affairs of a debtor are subject to control or supervision by a court; or
(c) a temporary stay of individual enforcement proceedings is granted by a court or by operation of law, in order to
allow for negotiations between the debtor and its creditors, provided that the proceedings in which the stay is
granted provide for suitable measures to protect the general body of creditors, and, where no agreement is reached,
are preliminary to one of the proceedings referred to in point (a) or (b).
Where the proceedings referred to in this paragraph may be commenced in situations where there is only a likelihood of
insolvency, their purpose shall be to avoid the debtor's insolvency or the cessation of the debtor's business activities.
The proceedings referred to in this paragraph are listed in Annex A.
2.
This Regulation shall not apply to proceedings referred to in paragraph 1 that concern:
(a) insurance undertakings;
(b) credit institutions;
(c) investment firms and other firms, institutions and undertakings to the extent that they are covered by Directive
2001/24/EC; or
(d) collective investment undertakings.
Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Regulation:
(1) ‘collective proceedings’ means proceedings which include all or a significant part of a debtor's creditors, provided
that, in the latter case, the proceedings do not affect the claims of creditors which are not involved in them;
(1) OJ C 358, 7.12.2013, p. 15.L 141/30
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
(2) ‘collective investment undertakings’ means undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS)
as defined in Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (1) and alternative investment
funds (AIFs) as defined in Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (2);
(3) ‘debtor in possession’ means a debtor in respect of which insolvency proceedings have been opened which do not
necessarily involve the appointment of an insolvency practitioner or the complete transfer of the rights and duties
to administer the debtor's assets to an insolvency practitioner and where, therefore, the debtor remains totally or at
least partially in control of its assets and affairs;
(4) ‘insolvency proceedings’ means the proceedings listed in Annex A;
(5) ‘insolvency practitioner’ means any person or body whose function, including on an interim basis, is to:
(i) verify and admit claims submitted in insolvency proceedings;
(ii) represent the collective interest of the creditors;
(iii) administer, either in full or in part, assets of which the debtor has been divested;
(iv) liquidate the assets referred to in point (iii); or
(v) supervise the administration of the debtor's affairs.
The persons and bodies referred to in the first subparagraph are listed in Annex B;
(6) ‘court’ means:
(i) in points (b) and (c) of Article 1(1), Article 4(2), Articles 5 and 6, Article 21(3), point (j) of Article 24(2),
Articles 36 and 39, and Articles 61 to 77, the judicial body of a Member State;
(ii) in all other articles, the judicial body or any other competent body of a Member State empowered to open
insolvency proceedings, to confirm such opening or to take decisions in the course of such proceedings;
(7) ‘judgment opening insolvency proceedings’ includes:
(i) the decision of any court to open insolvency proceedings or to confirm the opening of such proceedings; and
(ii) the decision of a court to appoint an insolvency practitioner;
(8) ‘the time of the opening of proceedings’ means the time at which the judgment opening insolvency proceedings
becomes effective, regardless of whether the judgment is final or not;
(9) ‘the Member State in which assets are situated’ means, in the case of:
(i)registered shares in companies other than those referred to in point (ii), the Member State within the territory
of which the company having issued the shares has its registered office;
(ii)financial instruments, the title to which is evidenced by entries in a register or account maintained by or on
behalf of an intermediary (‘book entry securities’), the Member State in which the register or account in which
the entries are made is maintained;
(iii) cash held in accounts with a credit institution, the Member State indicated in the account's IBAN, or, for cash
held in accounts with a credit institution which does not have an IBAN, the Member State in which the credit
institution holding the account has its central administration or, where the account is held with a branch,
agency or other establishment, the Member State in which the branch, agency or other establishment is
located;
(iv)property and rights, ownership of or entitlement to which is entered in a public register other than those
referred to in point (i), the Member State under the authority of which the register is kept;
(v)European patents, the Member State for which the European patent is granted;
(1) Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and
administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) (OJ L 302, 17.11.2009,
p. 32).
2
( ) Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund Managers and
amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010 (OJ L 174, 1.7.2011,
p. 1).5.6.2015
EN
(vi)
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/31
copyright and related rights, the Member State within the territory of which the owner of such rights has its
habitual residence or registered office;
(vii) tangible property, other than that referred to in points (i) to (iv), the Member State within the territory of
which the property is situated;
(viii) claims against third parties, other than those relating to assets referred to in point (iii), the Member State
within the territory of which the third party required to meet the claims has the centre of its main interests,
as determined in accordance with Article 3(1);
(10) ‘establishment’ means any place of operations where a debtor carries out or has carried out in the 3-month period
prior to the request to open main insolvency proceedings a non-transitory economic activity with human means
and assets;
(11) ‘local creditor’ means a creditor whose claims against a debtor arose from or in connection with the operation of
an establishment situated in a Member State other than the Member State in which the centre of the debtor's main
interests is located;
(12) ‘foreign creditor’ means a creditor which has its habitual residence, domicile or registered office in a Member State
other than the State of the opening of proceedings, including the tax authorities and social security authorities of
Member States;
(13) ‘group of companies’ means a parent undertaking and all its subsidiary undertakings;
(14) ‘parent undertaking’ means an undertaking which controls, either directly or indirectly, one or more subsidiary
undertakings. An undertaking which prepares consolidated financial statements in accordance with Directive
2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (1) shall be deemed to be a parent undertaking.
Article 3
International jurisdiction
1.
The courts of the Member State within the territory of which the centre of the debtor's main interests is situated
shall have jurisdiction to open insolvency proceedings (‘main insolvency proceedings’). The centre of main interests shall
be the place where the debtor conducts the administration of its interests on a regular basis and which is ascertainable
by third parties.
In the case of a company or legal person, the place of the registered office shall be presumed to be the centre of its main
interests in the absence of proof to the contrary. That presumption shall only apply if the registered office has not been
moved to another Member State within the 3-month period prior to the request for the opening of insolvency
proceedings.
In the case of an individual exercising an independent business or professional activity, the centre of main interests shall
be presumed to be that individual's principal place of business in the absence of proof to the contrary. That
presumption shall only apply if the individual's principal place of business has not been moved to another Member State
within the 3-month period prior to the request for the opening of insolvency proceedings.
In the case of any other individual, the centre of main interests shall be presumed to be the place of the individual's
habitual residence in the absence of proof to the contrary. This presumption shall only apply if the habitual residence
has not been moved to another Member State within the 6-month period prior to the request for the opening of
insolvency proceedings.
2.
Where the centre of the debtor's main interests is situated within the territory of a Member State, the courts of
another Member State shall have jurisdiction to open insolvency proceedings against that debtor only if it possesses an
establishment within the territory of that other Member State. The effects of those proceedings shall be restricted to the
assets of the debtor situated in the territory of the latter Member State.
3.
Where insolvency proceedings have been opened in accordance with paragraph 1, any proceedings opened
subsequently in accordance with paragraph 2 shall be secondary insolvency proceedings.
(1) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated
financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertaking, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19).L 141/32
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
4.
The territorial insolvency proceedings referred to in paragraph 2 may only be opened prior to the opening of main
insolvency proceedings in accordance with paragraph 1 where
(a) insolvency proceedings under paragraph 1 cannot be opened because of the conditions laid down by the law of the
Member State within the territory of which the centre of the debtor's main interests is situated; or
(b) the opening of territorial insolvency proceedings is requested by:
(i) a creditor whose claim arises from or is in connection with the operation of an establishment situated within the
territory of the Member State where the opening of territorial proceedings is requested; or
(ii) a public authority which, under the law of the Member State within the territory of which the establishment is
situated, has the right to request the opening of insolvency proceedings.
When main insolvency proceedings are opened, the territorial insolvency proceedings shall become secondary
insolvency proceedings.
Article 4
Examination as to jurisdiction
1.
A court seised of a request to open insolvency proceedings shall of its own motion examine whether it has
jurisdiction pursuant to Article 3. The judgment opening insolvency proceedings shall specify the grounds on which the
jurisdiction of the court is based, and, in particular, whether jurisdiction is based on Article 3(1) or (2).
2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, where insolvency proceedings are opened in accordance with national law without a
decision by a court, Member States may entrust the insolvency practitioner appointed in such proceedings to examine
whether the Member State in which a request for the opening of proceedings is pending has jurisdiction pursuant to
Article 3. Where this is the case, the insolvency practitioner shall specify in the decision opening the proceedings the
grounds on which jurisdiction is based and, in particular, whether jurisdiction is based on Article 3(1) or (2).
Article 5
Judicial review of the decision to open main insolvency proceedings
1.
The debtor or any creditor may challenge before a court the decision opening main insolvency proceedings on
grounds of international jurisdiction.
2.
The decision opening main insolvency proceedings may be challenged by parties other than those referred to in
paragraph 1 or on grounds other than a lack of international jurisdiction where national law so provides.
Article 6
Jurisdiction for actions deriving directly from insolvency proceedings and closely linked with them
1.
The courts of the Member State within the territory of which insolvency proceedings have been opened in
accordance with Article 3 shall have jurisdiction for any action which derives directly from the insolvency proceedings
and is closely linked with them, such as avoidance actions.
2.
Where an action referred to in paragraph 1 is related to an action in civil and commercial matters against the same
defendant, the insolvency practitioner may bring both actions before the courts of the Member State within the territory
of which the defendant is domiciled, or, where the action is brought against several defendants, before the courts of the
Member State within the territory of which any of them is domiciled, provided that those courts have jurisdiction
pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012.
The first subparagraph shall apply to the debtor in possession, provided that national law allows the debtor in
possession to bring actions on behalf of the insolvency estate.
3.
For the purpose of paragraph 2, actions are deemed to be related where they are so closely connected that it is
expedient to hear and determine them together to avoid the risk of irreconcilable judgments resulting from separate
proceedings.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/33
Article 7
Applicable law
1.
Save as otherwise provided in this Regulation, the law applicable to insolvency proceedings and their effects shall
be that of the Member State within the territory of which such proceedings are opened (the ‘State of the opening of
proceedings’).
2.
The law of the State of the opening of proceedings shall determine the conditions for the opening of those
proceedings, their conduct and their closure. In particular, it shall determine the following:
(a) the debtors against which insolvency proceedings may be brought on account of their capacity;
(b) the assets which form part of the insolvency estate and the treatment of assets acquired by or devolving on the
debtor after the opening of the insolvency proceedings;
(c) the respective powers of the debtor and the insolvency practitioner;
(d) the conditions under which set-offs may be invoked;
(e) the effects of insolvency proceedings on current contracts to which the debtor is party;
(f)
the effects of the insolvency proceedings on proceedings brought by individual creditors, with the exception of
pending lawsuits;
(g) the claims which are to be lodged against the debtor's insolvency estate and the treatment of claims arising after the
opening of insolvency proceedings;
(h) the rules governing the lodging, verification and admission of claims;
(i)the rules governing the distribution of proceeds from the realisation of assets, the ranking of claims and the rights
of creditors who have obtained partial satisfaction after the opening of insolvency proceedings by virtue of a right
in rem or through a set-off;
(j)the conditions for, and the effects of closure of, insolvency proceedings, in particular by composition;
(k) creditors' rights after the closure of insolvency proceedings;
(l)
who is to bear the costs and expenses incurred in the insolvency proceedings;
(m) the rules relating to the voidness, voidability or unenforceability of legal acts detrimental to the general body of
creditors.
Article 8
Third parties' rights in rem
1.
The opening of insolvency proceedings shall not affect the rights in rem of creditors or third parties in respect of
tangible or intangible, moveable or immoveable assets, both specific assets and collections of indefinite assets as a whole
which change from time to time, belonging to the debtor which are situated within the territory of another Member
State at the time of the opening of proceedings.
2.
The rights referred to in paragraph 1 shall, in particular, mean:
(a) the right to dispose of assets or have them disposed of and to obtain satisfaction from the proceeds of or income
from those assets, in particular by virtue of a lien or a mortgage;
(b) the exclusive right to have a claim met, in particular a right guaranteed by a lien in respect of the claim or by
assignment of the claim by way of a guarantee;
(c) the right to demand assets from, and/or to require restitution by, anyone having possession or use of them contrary
to the wishes of the party so entitled;
(d) a right in rem to the beneficial use of assets.
3.
The right, recorded in a public register and enforceable against third parties, based on which a right in rem within
the meaning of paragraph 1 may be obtained shall be considered to be a right in rem.L 141/34
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
4.
Paragraph 1 shall not preclude actions for voidness, voidability or unenforceability as referred to in point (m) of
Article 7(2).
Article 9
Set-off
1.
The opening of insolvency proceedings shall not affect the right of creditors to demand the set-off of their claims
against the claims of a debtor, where such a set-off is permitted by the law applicable to the insolvent debtor's claim.
2.
Paragraph 1 shall not preclude actions for voidness, voidability or unenforceability as referred to in point (m) of
Article 7(2).
Article 10
Reservation of title
1.
The opening of insolvency proceedings against the purchaser of an asset shall not affect sellers' rights that are
based on a reservation of title where at the time of the opening of proceedings the asset is situated within the territory
of a Member State other than the State of the opening of proceedings.
2.
The opening of insolvency proceedings against the seller of an asset, after delivery of the asset, shall not constitute
grounds for rescinding or terminating the sale and shall not prevent the purchaser from acquiring title where at the time
of the opening of proceedings the asset sold is situated within the territory of a Member State other than the State of
the opening of proceedings.
3.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not preclude actions for voidness, voidability or unenforceability as referred to in
point (m) of Article 7(2).
Article 11
Contracts relating to immoveable property
1.
The effects of insolvency proceedings on a contract conferring the right to acquire or make use of immoveable
property shall be governed solely by the law of the Member State within the territory of which the immoveable property
is situated.
2.
The court which opened main insolvency proceedings shall have jurisdiction to approve the termination or
modification of the contracts referred to in this Article where:
(a) the law of the Member State applicable to those contracts requires that such a contract may only be terminated or
modified with the approval of the court opening insolvency proceedings; and
(b) no insolvency proceedings have been opened in that Member State.
Article 12
Payment systems and financial markets
1.
Without prejudice to Article 8, the effects of insolvency proceedings on the rights and obligations of the parties to
a payment or settlement system or to a financial market shall be governed solely by the law of the Member State
applicable to that system or market.
2.
Paragraph 1 shall not preclude any action for voidness, voidability or unenforceability which may be taken to set
aside payments or transactions under the law applicable to the relevant payment system or financial market.5.6.2015
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
L 141/35
Article 13
Contracts of employment
1.
The effects of insolvency proceedings on employment contracts and relationships shall be governed solely by the
law of the Member State applicable to the contract of employment.
2.
The courts of the Member State in which secondary insolvency proceedings may be opened shall retain
jurisdiction to approve the termination or modification of the contracts referred to in this Article even if no insolvency
proceedings have been opened in that Member State.
The first subparagraph shall also apply to an authority competent under national law to approve the termination or
modification of the contracts referred to in this Article.
Article 14
Effects on rights subject to registration
The effects of insolvency proceedings on the rights of a debtor in immoveable property, a ship or an aircraft subject to
registration in a public register shall be determined by the law of the Member State under the authority of which the
register is kept.
Article 15
European patents with unitary effect and Community trade marks
For the purposes of this Regulation, a European patent with unitary effect, a Community trade mark or any other
similar right established by Union law may be included only in the proceedings referred to in Article 3(1).
Article 16
Detrimental acts
Point (m) of Article 7(2) shall not apply where the person who benefited from an act detrimental to all the creditors
provides proof that:
(a) the act is subject to the law of a Member State other than that of the State of the opening of proceedings; and
(b) the law of that Member State does not allow any means of challenging that act in the relevant case.
Article 17
Protection of third-party purchasers
Where, by an act concluded after the opening of insolvency proceedings, a debtor disposes, for consideration, of:
(a) an immoveable asset;
(b) a ship or an aircraft subject to registration in a public register; or
(c) securities the existence of which requires registration in a register laid down by law;
the validity of that act shall be governed by the law of the State within the territory of which the immoveable asset is
situated or under the authority of which the register is kept.
Article 18
Effects of insolvency proceedings on pending lawsuits or arbitral proceedings
The effects of insolvency proceedings on a pending lawsuit or pending arbitral proceedings concerning an asset or a
right which forms part of a debtor's insolvency estate shall be governed solely by the law of the Member State in which
that lawsuit is pending or in which the arbitral tribunal has its seat.L 141/36
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
CHAPTER II
RECOGNITION OF INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS
Article 19
Principle
1.
Any judgment opening insolvency proceedings handed down by a court of a Member State which has jurisdiction
pursuant to Article 3 shall be recognised in all other Member States from the moment that it becomes effective in the
State of the opening of proceedings.
The rule laid down in the first subparagraph shall also apply where, on account of a debtor's capacity, insolvency
proceedings cannot be brought against that debtor in other Member States.
2.
Recognition of the proceedings referred to in Article 3(1) shall not preclude the opening of the proceedings
referred to in Article 3(2) by a court in another Member State. The latter proceedings shall be secondary insolvency
proceedings within the meaning of Chapter III.
Article 20
Effects of recognition
1.
The judgment opening insolvency proceedings as referred to in Article 3(1) shall, with no further formalities,
produce the same effects in any other Member State as under the law of the State of the opening of proceedings, unless
this Regulation provides otherwise and as long as no proceedings referred to in Article 3(2) are opened in that other
Member State.
2.
The effects of the proceedings referred to in Article 3(2) may not be challenged in other Member States. Any
restriction of creditors' rights, in particular a stay or discharge, shall produce effects vis-à-vis assets situated within the
territory of another Member State only in the case of those creditors who have given their consent.
Article 21
Powers of the insolvency practitioner
1.
The insolvency practitioner appointed by a court which has jurisdiction pursuant to Article 3(1) may exercise all
the powers conferred on it, by the law of the State of the opening of proceedings, in another Member State, as long as
no other insolvency proceedings have been opened there and no preservation measure to the contrary has been taken
there further to a request for the opening of insolvency proceedings in that State. Subject to Articles 8 and 10, the
insolvency practitioner may, in particular, remove the debtor's assets from the territory of the Member State in which
they are situated.
2.
The insolvency practitioner appointed by a court which has jurisdiction pursuant to Article 3(2) may in any other
Member State claim through the courts or out of court that moveable property was removed from the territory of the
State of the opening of proceedings to the territory of that other Member State after the opening of the insolvency
proceedings. The insolvency practitioner may also bring any action to set aside which is in the interests of the creditors.
3.
In exercising its powers, the insolvency practitioner shall comply with the law of the Member State within the
territory of which it intends to take action, in particular with regard to procedures for the realisation of assets. Those
powers may not include coercive measures, unless ordered by a court of that Member State, or the right to rule on legal
proceedings or disputes.
Article 22
Proof of the insolvency practitioner's appointment
The insolvency practitioner's appointment shall be evidenced by a certified copy of the original decision appointing it or
by any other certificate issued by the court which has jurisdiction.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/37
A translation into the official language or one of the official languages of the Member State within the territory of which
it intends to act may be required. No legalisation or other similar formality shall be required.
Article 23
Return and imputation
1.
A creditor which, after the opening of the proceedings referred to in Article 3(1), obtains by any means, in
particular through enforcement, total or partial satisfaction of its claim on the assets belonging to a debtor situated
within the territory of another Member State, shall return what it has obtained to the insolvency practitioner, subject to
Articles 8 and 10.
2.
In order to ensure the equal treatment of creditors, a creditor which has, in the course of insolvency proceedings,
obtained a dividend on its claim shall share in distributions made in other proceedings only where creditors of the same
ranking or category have, in those other proceedings, obtained an equivalent dividend.
Article 24
Establishment of insolvency registers
1.
Member States shall establish and maintain in their territory one or several registers in which information
concerning insolvency proceedings is published (‘insolvency registers’). That information shall be published as soon as
possible after the opening of such proceedings.
2.
The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made publicly available, subject to the conditions laid down in
Article 27, and shall include the following (‘mandatory information’):
(a) the date of the opening of insolvency proceedings;
(b) the court opening insolvency proceedings and the case reference number, if any;
(c) the type of insolvency proceedings referred to in Annex A that were opened and, where applicable, any relevant
subtype of such proceedings opened in accordance with national law;
(d) whether jurisdiction for opening proceedings is based on Article 3(1), 3(2) or 3(4);
(e) if the debtor is a company or a legal person, the debtor's name, registration number, registered office or, if different,
postal address;
(f) if the debtor is an individual whether or not exercising an independent business or professional activity, the debtor's
name, registration number, if any, and postal address or, where the address is protected, the debtor's place and date
of birth;
(g) the name, postal address or e-mail address of the insolvency practitioner, if any, appointed in the proceedings;
(h) the time limit for lodging claims, if any, or a reference to the criteria for calculating that time limit;
(i) the date of closing main insolvency proceedings, if any;
(j) the court before which and, where applicable, the time limit within which a challenge of the decision opening
insolvency proceedings is to be lodged in accordance with Article 5, or a reference to the criteria for calculating that
time limit.
3.
Paragraph 2 shall not preclude Member States from including documents or additional information in their
national insolvency registers, such as directors' disqualifications related to insolvency.
4.
Member States shall not be obliged to include in the insolvency registers the information referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Article in relation to individuals not exercising an independent business or professional activity, or
to make such information publicly available through the system of interconnection of those registers, provided that
known foreign creditors are informed, pursuant to Article 54, of the elements referred to under point (j) of paragraph 2
of this Article.L 141/38
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Where a Member State makes use of the possibility referred to in the first subparagraph, the insolvency proceedings
shall not affect the claims of foreign creditors who have not received the information referred to in the first
subparagraph.
5.
The publication of information in the registers under this Regulation shall not have any legal effects other than
those set out in national law and in Article 55(6).
Article 25
Interconnection of insolvency registers
1.
The Commission shall establish a decentralised system for the interconnection of insolvency registers by means of
implementing acts. That system shall be composed of the insolvency registers and the European e-Justice Portal, which
shall serve as a central public electronic access point to information in the system. The system shall provide a search
service in all the official languages of the institutions of the Union in order to make available the mandatory
information and any other documents or information included in the insolvency registers which the Member States
choose to make available through the European e-Justice Portal.
2.
By means of implementing acts in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 87, the Commission shall
adopt the following by 26 June 2019:
(a) the technical specification defining the methods of communication and information exchange by electronic means
on the basis of the established interface specification for the system of interconnection of insolvency registers;
(b) the technical measures ensuring the minimum information technology security standards for communication and
distribution of information within the system of interconnection of insolvency registers;
(c) minimum criteria for the search service provided by the European e-Justice Portal based on the information set out
in Article 24;
(d) minimum criteria for the presentation of the results of such searches based on the information set out in Article 24;
(e) the means and the technical conditions of availability of services provided by the system of interconnection; and
(f) a glossary containing a basic explanation of the national insolvency proceedings listed in Annex A.
Article 26
Costs of establishing and interconnecting insolvency registers
1.
The establishment, maintenance and future development of the system of interconnection of insolvency registers
shall be financed from the general budget of the Union.
2.
Each Member State shall bear the costs of establishing and adjusting its national insolvency registers to make them
interoperable with the European e-Justice Portal, as well as the costs of administering, operating and maintaining those
registers. This shall be without prejudice to the possibility to apply for grants to support such activities under the
Union's financial programmes.
Article 27
Conditions of access to information via the system of interconnection
1.
Member States shall ensure that the mandatory information referred to in points (a) to (j) of Article 24(2) is
available free of charge via the system of interconnection of insolvency registers.
2.
This Regulation shall not preclude Member States from charging a reasonable fee for access to the documents or
additional information referred to in Article 24(3) via the system of interconnection of insolvency registers.
3.
Member States may make access to mandatory information concerning individuals who are not exercising an
independent business or professional activity, and concerning individuals exercising an independent business or
professional activity when the insolvency proceedings are not related to that activity, subject to supplementary search
criteria relating to the debtor in addition to the minimum criteria referred to in point (c) of Article 25(2).5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/39
4.
Member States may require that access to the information referred to in paragraph 3 be made conditional upon a
request to the competent authority. Member States may make access conditional upon the verification of the existence
of a legitimate interest for accessing such information. The requesting person shall be able to submit the request for
information electronically by means of a standard form via the European e-Justice Portal. Where a legitimate interest is
required, it shall be permissible for the requesting person to justify his request by electronic copies of relevant
documents. The requesting person shall be provided with an answer by the competent authority within 3 working days.
The requesting person shall not be obliged to provide translations of the documents justifying his request, or to bear any
costs of translation which the competent authority may incur.
Article 28
Publication in another Member State
1.
The insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession shall request that notice of the judgment opening
insolvency proceedings and, where appropriate, the decision appointing the insolvency practitioner be published in any
other Member State where an establishment of the debtor is located in accordance with the publication procedures
provided for in that Member State. Such publication shall specify, where appropriate, the insolvency practitioner
appointed and whether the jurisdiction rule applied is that pursuant to Article 3(1) or (2).
2.
The insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession may request that the information referred to in
paragraph 1 be published in any other Member State where the insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession
deems it necessary in accordance with the publication procedures provided for in that Member State.
Article 29
Registration in public registers of another Member State
1.
Where the law of a Member State in which an establishment of the debtor is located and this establishment has
been entered into a public register of that Member State, or the law of a Member State in which immovable property
belonging to the debtor is located, requires information on the opening of insolvency proceedings referred to in
Article 28 to be published in the land register, company register or any other public register, the insolvency practitioner
or the debtor in possession shall take all the necessary measures to ensure such a registration.
2.
The insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession may request such registration in any other Member State,
provided that the law of the Member State where the register is kept allows such registration.
Article 30
Costs
The costs of the publication and registration provided for in Articles 28 and 29 shall be regarded as costs and expenses
incurred in the proceedings.
Article 31
Honouring of an obligation to a debtor
1.
Where an obligation has been honoured in a Member State for the benefit of a debtor who is subject to insolvency
proceedings opened in another Member State, when it should have been honoured for the benefit of the insolvency
practitioner in those proceedings, the person honouring the obligation shall be deemed to have discharged it if he was
unaware of the opening of the proceedings.
2.
Where such an obligation is honoured before the publication provided for in Article 28 has been effected, the
person honouring the obligation shall be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, to have been unaware of
the opening of insolvency proceedings. Where the obligation is honoured after such publication has been effected, the
person honouring the obligation shall be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, to have been aware of the
opening of proceedings.L 141/40
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 32
Recognition and enforceability of other judgments
1.
Judgments handed down by a court whose judgment concerning the opening of proceedings is recognised in
accordance with Article 19 and which concern the course and closure of insolvency proceedings, and compositions
approved by that court, shall also be recognised with no further formalities. Such judgments shall be enforced in
accordance with Articles 39 to 44 and 47 to 57 of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012.
The first subparagraph shall also apply to judgments deriving directly from the insolvency proceedings and which are
closely linked with them, even if they were handed down by another court.
The first subparagraph shall also apply to judgments relating to preservation measures taken after the request for the
opening of insolvency proceedings or in connection with it.
2.
The recognition and enforcement of judgments other than those referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be
governed by Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 provided that that Regulation is applicable.
Article 33
Public policy
Any Member State may refuse to recognise insolvency proceedings opened in another Member State or to enforce a
judgment handed down in the context of such proceedings where the effects of such recognition or enforcement would
be manifestly contrary to that State's public policy, in particular its fundamental principles or the constitutional rights
and liberties of the individual.
CHAPTER III
SECONDARY INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS
Article 34
Opening of proceedings
Where main insolvency proceedings have been opened by a court of a Member State and recognised in another Member
State, a court of that other Member State which has jurisdiction pursuant to Article 3(2) may open secondary insolvency
proceedings in accordance with the provisions set out in this Chapter. Where the main insolvency proceedings required
that the debtor be insolvent, the debtor's insolvency shall not be re-examined in the Member State in which secondary
insolvency proceedings may be opened. The effects of secondary insolvency proceedings shall be restricted to the assets
of the debtor situated within the territory of the Member State in which those proceedings have been opened.
Article 35
Applicable law
Save as otherwise provided for in this Regulation, the law applicable to secondary insolvency proceedings shall be that
of the Member State within the territory of which the secondary insolvency proceedings are opened.
Article 36
Right to give an undertaking in order to avoid secondary insolvency proceedings
1.
In order to avoid the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings, the insolvency practitioner in the main
insolvency proceedings may give a unilateral undertaking (the ‘undertaking’) in respect of the assets located in the
Member State in which secondary insolvency proceedings could be opened, that when distributing those assets or the
proceeds received as a result of their realisation, it will comply with the distribution and priority rights under national
law that creditors would have if secondary insolvency proceedings were opened in that Member State. The undertaking
shall specify the factual assumptions on which it is based, in particular in respect of the value of the assets located in the
Member State concerned and the options available to realise such assets.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/41
2.
Where an undertaking has been given in accordance with this Article, the law applicable to the distribution of
proceeds from the realisation of assets referred to in paragraph 1, to the ranking of creditors' claims, and to the rights of
creditors in relation to the assets referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the law of the Member State in which secondary
insolvency proceedings could have been opened. The relevant point in time for determining the assets referred to in
paragraph 1 shall be the moment at which the undertaking is given.
3.
The undertaking shall be made in the official language or one of the official languages of the Member State where
secondary insolvency proceedings could have been opened, or, where there are several official languages in that Member
State, the official language or one of the official languages of the place in which secondary insolvency proceedings could
have been opened.
4.
The undertaking shall be made in writing. It shall be subject to any other requirements relating to form and
approval requirements as to distributions, if any, of the State of the opening of the main insolvency proceedings.
5.
The undertaking shall be approved by the known local creditors. The rules on qualified majority and voting that
apply to the adoption of restructuring plans under the law of the Member State where secondary insolvency proceedings
could have been opened shall also apply to the approval of the undertaking. Creditors shall be able to participate in the
vote by distance means of communication, where national law so permits. The insolvency practitioner shall inform the
known local creditors of the undertaking, of the rules and procedures for its approval, and of the approval or rejection
of the undertaking.
6.
An undertaking given and approved in accordance with this Article shall be binding on the estate. If secondary
insolvency proceedings are opened in accordance with Articles 37 and 38, the insolvency practitioner in the main
insolvency proceedings shall transfer any assets which it removed from the territory of that Member State after the
undertaking was given or, where those assets have already been realised, their proceeds, to the insolvency practitioner in
the secondary insolvency proceedings.
7.
Where the insolvency practitioner has given an undertaking, it shall inform local creditors about the intended
distributions prior to distributing the assets and proceeds referred to in paragraph 1. If that information does not
comply with the terms of the undertaking or the applicable law, any local creditor may challenge such distribution
before the courts of the Member State in which main insolvency proceedings have been opened in order to obtain a
distribution in accordance with the terms of the undertaking and the applicable law. In such cases, no distribution shall
take place until the court has taken a decision on the challenge.
8.
Local creditors may apply to the courts of the Member State in which main insolvency proceedings have been
opened, in order to require the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings to take any suitable measures
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the undertaking available under the law of the State of the opening of
main insolvency proceedings.
9.
Local creditors may also apply to the courts of the Member State in which secondary insolvency proceedings could
have been opened in order to require the court to take provisional or protective measures to ensure compliance by the
insolvency practitioner with the terms of the undertaking.
10. The insolvency practitioner shall be liable for any damage caused to local creditors as a result of its non-
compliance with the obligations and requirements set out in this Article.
11. For the purpose of this Article, an authority which is established in the Member State where secondary
insolvency proceedings could have been opened and which is obliged under Directive 2008/94/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council (1) to guarantee the payment of employees' outstanding claims resulting from contracts of
employment or employment relationships shall be considered to be a local creditor, where the national law so provides.
(1) Directive 2008/94/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2008 on the protection of employees in the event of
the insolvency of their employer (OJ L 283, 28.10.2008, p. 36).L 141/42
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 37
Right to request the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings
1.
The opening of secondary insolvency proceedings may be requested by:
(a) the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings;
(b) any other person or authority empowered to request the opening of insolvency proceedings under the law of the
Member State within the territory of which the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings is requested.
2.
Where an undertaking has become binding in accordance with Article 36, the request for opening secondary
insolvency proceedings shall be lodged within 30 days of having received notice of the approval of the undertaking.
Article 38
Decision to open secondary insolvency proceedings
1.
A court seised of a request to open secondary insolvency proceedings shall immediately give notice to the
insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession in the main insolvency proceedings and give it an opportunity to be
heard on the request.
2.
Where the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings has given an undertaking in accordance
with Article 36, the court referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall, at the request of the insolvency practitioner,
not open secondary insolvency proceedings if it is satisfied that the undertaking adequately protects the general interests
of local creditors.
3.
Where a temporary stay of individual enforcement proceedings has been granted in order to allow for negotiations
between the debtor and its creditors, the court, at the request of the insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession,
may stay the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings for a period not exceeding 3 months, provided that suitable
measures are in place to protect the interests of local creditors.
The court referred to in paragraph 1 may order protective measures to protect the interests of local creditors by
requiring the insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession not to remove or dispose of any assets which are
located in the Member State where its establishment is located unless this is done in the ordinary course of business. The
court may also order other measures to protect the interest of local creditors during a stay, unless this is incompatible
with the national rules on civil procedure.
The stay of the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings shall be lifted by the court of its own motion or at the
request of any creditor if, during the stay, an agreement in the negotiations referred to in the first subparagraph has been
concluded.
The stay may be lifted by the court of its own motion or at the request of any creditor if the continuation of the stay is
detrimental to the creditor's rights, in particular if the negotiations have been disrupted or it has become evident that
they are unlikely to be concluded, or if the insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession has infringed the
prohibition on disposal of its assets or on removal of them from the territory of the Member State where the
establishment is located.
4.
At the request of the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings, the court referred to in
paragraph 1 may open a type of insolvency proceedings as listed in Annex A other than the type initially requested,
provided that the conditions for opening that type of proceedings under national law are fulfilled and that that type of
proceedings is the most appropriate as regards the interests of the local creditors and coherence between the main and
secondary insolvency proceedings. The second sentence of Article 34 shall apply.
Article 39
Judicial review of the decision to open secondary insolvency proceedings
The insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings may challenge the decision to open secondary
insolvency proceedings before the courts of the Member State in which secondary insolvency proceedings have been
opened on the ground that the court did not comply with the conditions and requirements of Article 38.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/43
Article 40
Advance payment of costs and expenses
Where the law of the Member State in which the opening of secondary insolvency proceedings is requested requires that
the debtor's assets be sufficient to cover in whole or in part the costs and expenses of the proceedings, the court may,
when it receives such a request, require the applicant to make an advance payment of costs or to provide appropriate
security.
Article 41
Cooperation and communication between insolvency practitioners
1.
The insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings and the insolvency practitioner or practitioners in
secondary insolvency proceedings concerning the same debtor shall cooperate with each other to the extent such
cooperation is not incompatible with the rules applicable to the respective proceedings. Such cooperation may take any
form, including the conclusion of agreements or protocols.
2.
In implementing the cooperation set out in paragraph 1, the insolvency practitioners shall:
(a) as soon as possible communicate to each other any information which may be relevant to the other proceedings, in
particular any progress made in lodging and verifying claims and all measures aimed at rescuing or restructuring the
debtor, or at terminating the proceedings, provided appropriate arrangements are made to protect confidential
information;
(b) explore the possibility of restructuring the debtor and, where such a possibility exists, coordinate the elaboration and
implementation of a restructuring plan;
(c) coordinate the administration of the realisation or use of the debtor's assets and affairs; the insolvency practitioner
in the secondary insolvency proceedings shall give the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings an
early opportunity to submit proposals on the realisation or use of the assets in the secondary insolvency
proceedings.
3.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply mutatis mutandis to situations where, in the main or in the secondary insolvency
proceedings or in any territorial insolvency proceedings concerning the same debtor and open at the same time, the
debtor remains in possession of its assets.
Article 42
Cooperation and communication between courts
1.
In order to facilitate the coordination of main, territorial and secondary insolvency proceedings concerning the
same debtor, a court before which a request to open insolvency proceedings is pending, or which has opened such
proceedings, shall cooperate with any other court before which a request to open insolvency proceedings is pending, or
which has opened such proceedings, to the extent that such cooperation is not incompatible with the rules applicable to
each of the proceedings. For that purpose, the courts may, where appropriate, appoint an independent person or body
acting on its instructions, provided that it is not incompatible with the rules applicable to them.
2.
In implementing the cooperation set out in paragraph 1, the courts, or any appointed person or body acting on
their behalf, as referred to in paragraph 1, may communicate directly with, or request information or assistance directly
from, each other provided that such communication respects the procedural rights of the parties to the proceedings and
the confidentiality of information.
3.
The cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 may be implemented by any means that the court considers
appropriate. It may, in particular, concern:
(a) coordination in the appointment of the insolvency practitioners;
(b) communication of information by any means considered appropriate by the court;
(c) coordination of the administration and supervision of the debtor's assets and affairs;
(d) coordination of the conduct of hearings;
(e) coordination in the approval of protocols, where necessary.L 141/44
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 43
Cooperation and communication between insolvency practitioners and courts
1.
In order to facilitate the coordination of main, territorial and secondary insolvency proceedings opened in respect
of the same debtor:
(a) an insolvency practitioner in main insolvency proceedings shall cooperate and communicate with any court before
which a request to open secondary insolvency proceedings is pending or which has opened such proceedings;
(b) an insolvency practitioner in territorial or secondary insolvency proceedings shall cooperate and communicate with
the court before which a request to open main insolvency proceedings is pending or which has opened such
proceedings; and
(c) an insolvency practitioner in territorial or secondary insolvency proceedings shall cooperate and communicate with
the court before which a request to open other territorial or secondary insolvency proceedings is pending or which
has opened such proceedings;
to the extent that such cooperation and communication are not incompatible with the rules applicable to each of the
proceedings and do not entail any conflict of interest.
2.
The cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 may be implemented by any appropriate means, such as those set out
in Article 42(3).
Article 44
Costs of cooperation and communication
The requirements laid down in Articles 42 and 43 shall not result in courts charging costs to each other for cooperation
and communication.
Article 45
Exercise of creditors' rights
1.
Any creditor may lodge its claim in the main insolvency proceedings and in any secondary insolvency proceedings.
2.
The insolvency practitioners in the main and any secondary insolvency proceedings shall lodge in other
proceedings claims which have already been lodged in the proceedings for which they were appointed, provided that the
interests of creditors in the latter proceedings are served by doing so, subject to the right of creditors to oppose such
lodgement or to withdraw the lodgement of their claims where the law applicable so provides.
3.
The insolvency practitioner in the main or secondary insolvency proceedings shall be entitled to participate in
other proceedings on the same basis as a creditor, in particular by attending creditors' meetings.
Article 46
Stay of the process of realisation of assets
1.
The court which opened the secondary insolvency proceedings shall stay the process of realisation of assets in
whole or in part on receipt of a request from the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings. In such a
case, it may require the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings to take any suitable measure to
guarantee the interests of the creditors in the secondary insolvency proceedings and of individual classes of creditors.
Such a request from the insolvency practitioner may be rejected only if it is manifestly of no interest to the creditors in
the main insolvency proceedings. Such a stay of the process of realisation of assets may be ordered for up to 3 months.
It may be continued or renewed for similar periods.5.6.2015
2.
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/45
The court referred to in paragraph 1 shall terminate the stay of the process of realisation of assets:
(a) at the request of the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings;
(b) of its own motion, at the request of a creditor or at the request of the insolvency practitioner in the secondary
insolvency proceedings if that measure no longer appears justified, in particular, by the interests of creditors in the
main insolvency proceedings or in the secondary insolvency proceedings.
Article 47
Power of the insolvency practitioner to propose restructuring plans
1.
Where the law of the Member State where secondary insolvency proceedings have been opened allows for such
proceedings to be closed without liquidation by a restructuring plan, a composition or a comparable measure, the
insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings shall be empowered to propose such a measure in
accordance with the procedure of that Member State.
2.
Any restriction of creditors' rights arising from a measure referred to in paragraph 1 which is proposed in
secondary insolvency proceedings, such as a stay of payment or discharge of debt, shall have no effect in respect of
assets of a debtor that are not covered by those proceedings, without the consent of all the creditors having an interest.
Article 48
Impact of closure of insolvency proceedings
1.
Without prejudice to Article 49, the closure of insolvency proceedings shall not prevent the continuation of other
insolvency proceedings concerning the same debtor which are still open at that point in time.
2.
Where insolvency proceedings concerning a legal person or a company in the Member State of that person's or
company's registered office would entail the dissolution of the legal person or of the company, that legal person or
company shall not cease to exist until any other insolvency proceedings concerning the same debtor have been closed,
or the insolvency practitioner or practitioners in such proceedings have given consent to the dissolution.
Article 49
Assets remaining in the secondary insolvency proceedings
If, by the liquidation of assets in the secondary insolvency proceedings, it is possible to meet all claims allowed under
those proceedings, the insolvency practitioner appointed in those proceedings shall immediately transfer any assets
remaining to the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings.
Article 50
Subsequent opening of the main insolvency proceedings
Where the proceedings referred to in Article 3(1) are opened following the opening of the proceedings referred to in
Article 3(2) in another Member State, Articles 41, 45, 46, 47 and 49 shall apply to those opened first, in so far as the
progress of those proceedings so permits.
Article 51
Conversion of secondary insolvency proceedings
1.
At the request of the insolvency practitioner in the main insolvency proceedings, the court of the Member State in
which secondary insolvency proceedings have been opened may order the conversion of the secondary insolvency
proceedings into another type of insolvency proceedings listed in Annex A, provided that the conditions for opening
that type of proceedings under national law are fulfilled and that that type of proceedings is the most appropriate as
regards the interests of the local creditors and coherence between the main and secondary insolvency proceedings.L 141/46
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
2.
When considering the request referred to in paragraph 1, the court may seek information from the insolvency
practitioners involved in both proceedings.
Article 52
Preservation measures
Where the court of a Member State which has jurisdiction pursuant to Article 3(1) appoints a temporary administrator
in order to ensure the preservation of a debtor's assets, that temporary administrator shall be empowered to request any
measures to secure and preserve any of the debtor's assets situated in another Member State, provided for under the law
of that Member State, for the period between the request for the opening of insolvency proceedings and the judgment
opening the proceedings.
CHAPTER IV
PROVISION OF INFORMATION FOR CREDITORS AND LODGEMENT OF THEIR CLAIMS
Article 53
Right to lodge claims
Any foreign creditor may lodge claims in insolvency proceedings by any means of communication, which are accepted
by the law of the State of the opening of proceedings. Representation by a lawyer or another legal professional shall not
be mandatory for the sole purpose of lodging of claims.
Article 54
Duty to inform creditors
1.
As soon as insolvency proceedings are opened in a Member State, the court of that State having jurisdiction or the
insolvency practitioner appointed by that court shall immediately inform the known foreign creditors.
2.
The information referred to in paragraph 1, provided by an individual notice, shall in particular include time
limits, the penalties laid down with regard to those time limits, the body or authority empowered to accept the
lodgement of claims and any other measures laid down. Such notice shall also indicate whether creditors whose claims
are preferential or secured in rem need to lodge their claims. The notice shall also include a copy of the standard form
for lodging of claims referred to in Article 55 or information on where that form is available.
3.
The information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be provided using the standard notice form
to be established in accordance with Article 88. The form shall be published in the European e-Justice Portal and shall
bear the heading ‘Notice of insolvency proceedings’ in all the official languages of the institutions of the Union. It shall
be transmitted in the official language of the State of the opening of proceedings or, if there are several official
languages in that Member State, in the official language or one of the official languages of the place where insolvency
proceedings have been opened, or in another language which that State has indicated it can accept, in accordance with
Article 55(5), if it can be assumed that that language is easier to understand for the foreign creditors.
4.
In insolvency proceedings relating to an individual not exercising a business or professional activity, the use of the
standard form referred to in this Article shall not be obligatory if creditors are not required to lodge their claims in
order to have their claims taken into account in the proceedings.
Article 55
Procedure for lodging claims
1.
Any foreign creditor may lodge its claim using the standard claims form to be established in accordance with
Article 88. The form shall bear the heading ‘Lodgement of claims’ in all the official languages of the institutions of the
Union.5.6.2015
2.
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
L 141/47
The standard claims form referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the following information:
(a) the name, postal address, e-mail address, if any, personal identification number, if any, and bank details of the
foreign creditor referred to in paragraph 1;
(b) the amount of the claim, specifying the principal and, where applicable, interest and the date on which it arose and
the date on which it became due, if different;
(c) if interest is claimed, the interest rate, whether the interest is of a legal or contractual nature, the period of time for
which the interest is claimed and the capitalised amount of interest;
(d) if costs incurred in asserting the claim prior to the opening of proceedings are claimed, the amount and the details
of those costs;
(e) the nature of the claim;
(f) whether any preferential creditor status is claimed and the basis of such a claim;
(g) whether security in rem or a reservation of title is alleged in respect of the claim and if so, what assets are covered
by the security interest being invoked, the date on which the security was granted and, where the security has been
registered, the registration number; and
(h) whether any set-off is claimed and, if so, the amounts of the mutual claims existing on the date when insolvency
proceedings were opened, the date on which they arose and the amount net of set-off claimed.
The standard claims form shall be accompanied by copies of any supporting documents.
3.
The standard claims form shall indicate that the provision of information concerning the bank details and the
personal identification number of the creditor referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 is not compulsory.
4.
When a creditor lodges its claim by means other than the standard form referred to in paragraph 1, the claim shall
contain the information referred to in paragraph 2.
5.
Claims may be lodged in any official language of the institutions of the Union. The court, the insolvency
practitioner or the debtor in possession may require the creditor to provide a translation in the official language of the
State of the opening of proceedings or, if there are several official languages in that Member State, in the official
language or one of the official languages of the place where insolvency proceedings have been opened, or in another
language which that Member State has indicated it can accept. Each Member State shall indicate whether it accepts any
official language of the institutions of the Union other than its own for the purpose of the lodging of claims.
6.
Claims shall be lodged within the period stipulated by the law of the State of the opening of proceedings. In the
case of a foreign creditor, that period shall not be less than 30 days following the publication of the opening of
insolvency proceedings in the insolvency register of the State of the opening of proceedings. Where a Member State
relies on Article 24(4), that period shall not be less than 30 days following a creditor having been informed pursuant to
Article 54.
7.
Where the court, the insolvency practitioner or the debtor in possession has doubts in relation to a claim lodged
in accordance with this Article, it shall give the creditor the opportunity to provide additional evidence on the existence
and the amount of the claim.
CHAPTER V
INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS OF MEMBERS OF A GROUP OF COMPANIES
SECTION 1
Cooperation and communication
Article 56
Cooperation and communication between insolvency practitioners
1.
Where insolvency proceedings relate to two or more members of a group of companies, an insolvency practitioner
appointed in proceedings concerning a member of the group shall cooperate with any insolvency practitioner appointed
in proceedings concerning another member of the same group to the extent that such cooperation is appropriate toL 141/48
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
facilitate the effective administration of those proceedings, is not incompatible with the rules applicable to such
proceedings and does not entail any conflict of interest. That cooperation may take any form, including the conclusion
of agreements or protocols.
2.
In implementing the cooperation set out in paragraph 1, insolvency practitioners shall:
(a) as soon as possible communicate to each other any information which may be relevant to the other proceedings,
provided appropriate arrangements are made to protect confidential information;
(b) consider whether possibilities exist for coordinating the administration and supervision of the affairs of the group
members which are subject to insolvency proceedings, and if so, coordinate such administration and supervision;
(c) consider whether possibilities exist for restructuring group members which are subject to insolvency proceedings
and, if so, coordinate with regard to the proposal and negotiation of a coordinated restructuring plan.
For the purposes of points (b) and (c), all or some of the insolvency practitioners referred to in paragraph 1 may agree
to grant additional powers to an insolvency practitioner appointed in one of the proceedings where such an agreement
is permitted by the rules applicable to each of the proceedings. They may also agree on the allocation of certain tasks
amongst them, where such allocation of tasks is permitted by the rules applicable to each of the proceedings.
Article 57
Cooperation and communication between courts
1.
Where insolvency proceedings relate to two or more members of a group of companies, a court which has opened
such proceedings shall cooperate with any other court before which a request to open proceedings concerning another
member of the same group is pending or which has opened such proceedings to the extent that such cooperation is
appropriate to facilitate the effective administration of the proceedings, is not incompatible with the rules applicable to
them and does not entail any conflict of interest. For that purpose, the courts may, where appropriate, appoint an
independent person or body to act on its instructions, provided that this is not incompatible with the rules applicable to
them.
2.
In implementing the cooperation set out in paragraph 1, courts, or any appointed person or body acting on their
behalf, as referred to in paragraph 1, may communicate directly with each other, or request information or assistance
directly from each other, provided that such communication respects the procedural rights of the parties to the
proceedings and the confidentiality of information.
3.
The cooperation referred to in paragraph 1 may be implemented by any means that the court considers
appropriate. It may, in particular, concern:
(a) coordination in the appointment of insolvency practitioners;
(b) communication of information by any means considered appropriate by the court;
(c) coordination of the administration and supervision of the assets and affairs of the members of the group;
(d) coordination of the conduct of hearings;
(e) coordination in the approval of protocols where necessary.
Article 58
Cooperation and communication between insolvency practitioners and courts
An insolvency practitioner appointed in insolvency proceedings concerning a member of a group of companies:
(a) shall cooperate and communicate with any court before which a request for the opening of proceedings in respect
of another member of the same group of companies is pending or which has opened such proceedings; and
(b) may request information from that court concerning the proceedings regarding the other member of the group or
request assistance concerning the proceedings in which he has been appointed;
to the extent that such cooperation and communication are appropriate to facilitate the effective administration of the
proceedings, do not entail any conflict of interest and are not incompatible with the rules applicable to them.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/49
Article 59
Costs of cooperation and communication in proceedings concerning members of a group of companies
The costs of the cooperation and communication provided for in Articles 56 to 60 incurred by an insolvency
practitioner or a court shall be regarded as costs and expenses incurred in the respective proceedings.
Article 60
Powers of the insolvency practitioner in proceedings concerning members of a group of companies
1.
An insolvency practitioner appointed in insolvency proceedings opened in respect of a member of a group of
companies may, to the extent appropriate to facilitate the effective administration of the proceedings:
(a) be heard in any of the proceedings opened in respect of any other member of the same group;
(b) request a stay of any measure related to the realisation of the assets in the proceedings opened with respect to any
other member of the same group, provided that:
(i)
a restructuring plan for all or some members of the group for which insolvency proceedings have been opened
has been proposed under point (c) of Article 56(2) and presents a reasonable chance of success;
(ii) such a stay is necessary in order to ensure the proper implementation of the restructuring plan;
(iii) the restructuring plan would be to the benefit of the creditors in the proceedings for which the stay is
requested; and
(iv) neither the insolvency proceedings in which the insolvency practitioner referred to in paragraph 1 of this
Article has been appointed nor the proceedings in respect of which the stay is requested are subject to
coordination under Section 2 of this Chapter;
(c) apply for the opening of group coordination proceedings in accordance with Article 61.
2.
The court having opened proceedings referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 shall stay any measure related to the
realisation of the assets in the proceedings in whole or in part if it is satisfied that the conditions referred to in point (b)
of paragraph 1 are fulfilled.
Before ordering the stay, the court shall hear the insolvency practitioner appointed in the proceedings for which the stay
is requested. Such a stay may be ordered for any period, not exceeding 3 months, which the court considers appropriate
and which is compatible with the rules applicable to the proceedings.
The court ordering the stay may require the insolvency practitioner referred to in paragraph 1 to take any suitable
measure available under national law to guarantee the interests of the creditors in the proceedings.
The court may extend the duration of the stay by such further period or periods as it considers appropriate and which
are compatible with the rules applicable to the proceedings, provided that the conditions referred to in points (b)(ii)
to (iv) of paragraph 1 continue to be fulfilled and that the total duration of the stay (the initial period together with any
such extensions) does not exceed 6 months.
SECTION 2
Coordination
S u bsec ti on 1
Pr oc ed ure
Article 61
Request to open group coordination proceedings
1.
Group coordination proceedings may be requested before any court having jurisdiction over the insolvency
proceedings of a member of the group, by an insolvency practitioner appointed in insolvency proceedings opened in
relation to a member of the group.L 141/50
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
2.
The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made in accordance with the conditions provided for by the law
applicable to the proceedings in which the insolvency practitioner has been appointed.
3.
The request referred to in paragraph 1 shall be accompanied by:
(a) a proposal as to the person to be nominated as the group coordinator (‘the coordinator’), details of his or her
eligibility pursuant to Article 71, details of his or her qualifications and his or her written agreement to act as
coordinator;
(b) an outline of the proposed group coordination, and in particular the reasons why the conditions set out in
Article 63(1) are fulfilled;
(c) a list of the insolvency practitioners appointed in relation to the members of the group and, where relevant, the
courts and competent authorities involved in the insolvency proceedings of the members of the group;
(d) an outline of the estimated costs of the proposed group coordination and the estimation of the share of those costs
to be paid by each member of the group.
Article 62
Priority rule
Without prejudice to Article 66, where the opening of group coordination proceedings is requested before courts of
different Member States, any court other than the court first seised shall decline jurisdiction in favour of that court.
Article 63
Notice by the court seised
1.
The court seised of a request to open group coordination proceedings shall give notice as soon as possible of the
request for the opening of group coordination proceedings and of the proposed coordinator to the insolvency practi­
tioners appointed in relation to the members of the group as indicated in the request referred to in point (c) of
Article 61(3), if it is satisfied that:
(a) the opening of such proceedings is appropriate to facilitate the effective administration of the insolvency
proceedings relating to the different group members;
(b) no creditor of any group member expected to participate in the proceedings is likely to be financially disadvantaged
by the inclusion of that member in such proceedings; and
(c) the proposed coordinator fulfils the requirements laid down in Article 71.
2.
The notice referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall list the elements referred to in points (a) to (d) of
Article 61(3).
3.The notice referred to in paragraph 1 shall be sent by registered letter, attested by an acknowledgment of receipt.
4.The court seised shall give the insolvency practitioners involved the opportunity to be heard.
Article 64
Objections by insolvency practitioners
1.
An insolvency practitioner appointed in respect of any group member may object to:
(a) the inclusion within group coordination proceedings of the insolvency proceedings in respect of which it has been
appointed; or
(b) the person proposed as a coordinator.
2.
Objections pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be lodged with the court referred to in Article 63 within
30 days of receipt of notice of the request for the opening of group coordination proceedings by the insolvency
practitioner referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.5.6.2015
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
L 141/51
The objection may be made by means of the standard form established in accordance with Article 88.
3.
Prior to taking the decision to participate or not to participate in the coordination in accordance with point (a) of
paragraph 1, an insolvency practitioner shall obtain any approval which may be required under the law of the State of
the opening of proceedings for which it has been appointed.
Article 65
Consequences of objection to the inclusion in group coordination
1.
Where an insolvency practitioner has objected to the inclusion of the proceedings in respect of which it has been
appointed in group coordination proceedings, those proceedings shall not be included in the group coordination
proceedings.
2.
The powers of the court referred to in Article 68 or of the coordinator arising from those proceedings shall have
no effect as regards that member, and shall entail no costs for that member.
Article 66
Choice of court for group coordination proceedings
1.
Where at least two-thirds of all insolvency practitioners appointed in insolvency proceedings of the members of
the group have agreed that a court of another Member State having jurisdiction is the most appropriate court for the
opening of group coordination proceedings, that court shall have exclusive jurisdiction.
2.
The choice of court shall be made by joint agreement in writing or evidenced in writing. It may be made until
such time as group coordination proceedings have been opened in accordance with Article 68.
3.
Any court other than the court seised under paragraph 1 shall decline jurisdiction in favour of that court.
4.
The request for the opening of group coordination proceedings shall be submitted to the court agreed in
accordance with Article 61.
Article 67
Consequences of objections to the proposed coordinator
Where objections to the person proposed as coordinator have been received from an insolvency practitioner which does
not also object to the inclusion in the group coordination proceedings of the member in respect of which it has been
appointed, the court may refrain from appointing that person and invite the objecting insolvency practitioner to submit
a new request in accordance with Article 61(3).
Article 68
Decision to open group coordination proceedings
1.
After the period referred to in Article 64(2) has elapsed, the court may open group coordination proceedings
where it is satisfied that the conditions of Article 63(1) are met. In such a case, the court shall:
(a) appoint a coordinator;
(b) decide on the outline of the coordination; and
(c) decide on the estimation of costs and the share to be paid by the group members.
2.
The decision opening group coordination proceedings shall be brought to the notice of the participating
insolvency practitioners and of the coordinator.L 141/52
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 69
Subsequent opt-in by insolvency practitioners
1.
In accordance with its national law, any insolvency practitioner may request, after the court decision referred to in
Article 68, the inclusion of the proceedings in respect of which it has been appointed, where:
(a) there has been an objection to the inclusion of the insolvency proceedings within the group coordination
proceedings; or
(b) insolvency proceedings with respect to a member of the group have been opened after the court has opened group
coordination proceedings.
2.
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the coordinator may accede to such a request, after consulting the insolvency
practitioners involved, where
(a) he or she is satisfied that, taking into account the stage that the group coordination proceedings has reached at the
time of the request, the criteria set out in points (a) and (b) of Article 63(1) are met; or
(b) all insolvency practitioners involved agree, subject to the conditions in their national law.
3.
The coordinator shall inform the court and the participating insolvency practitioners of his or her decision
pursuant to paragraph 2 and of the reasons on which it is based.
4.
Any participating insolvency practitioner or any insolvency practitioner whose request for inclusion in the group
coordination proceedings has been rejected may challenge the decision referred to in paragraph 2 in accordance with the
procedure set out under the law of the Member State in which the group coordination proceedings have been opened.
Article 70
Recommendations and group coordination plan
1.
When conducting their insolvency proceedings, insolvency practitioners shall consider the recommendations of
the coordinator and the content of the group coordination plan referred to in Article 72(1).
2.
An insolvency practitioner shall not be obliged to follow in whole or in part the coordinator's recommendations
or the group coordination plan.
If it does not follow the coordinator's recommendations or the group coordination plan, it shall give reasons for not
doing so to the persons or bodies that it is to report to under its national law, and to the coordinator.
Su b sect i on 2
Ge ner a l pr ovis io ns
Article 71
The coordinator
1.
The coordinator shall be a person eligible under the law of a Member State to act as an insolvency practitioner.
2.
The coordinator shall not be one of the insolvency practitioners appointed to act in respect of any of the group
members, and shall have no conflict of interest in respect of the group members, their creditors and the insolvency
practitioners appointed in respect of any of the group members.
Article 72
Tasks and rights of the coordinator
1.
The coordinator shall:
(a) identify and outline recommendations for the coordinated conduct of the insolvency proceedings;
(b) propose a group coordination plan that identifies, describes and recommends a comprehensive set of measures
appropriate to an integrated approach to the resolution of the group members' insolvencies. In particular, the plan
may contain proposals for:5.6.2015
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
(i)
L 141/53
the measures to be taken in order to re-establish the economic performance and the financial soundness of the
group or any part of it;
(ii) the settlement of intra-group disputes as regards intra-group transactions and avoidance actions;
(iii) agreements between the insolvency practitioners of the insolvent group members.
2.
The coordinator may also:
(a) be heard and participate, in particular by attending creditors' meetings, in any of the proceedings opened in respect
of any member of the group;
(b) mediate any dispute arising between two or more insolvency practitioners of group members;
(c) present and explain his or her group coordination plan to the persons or bodies that he or she is to report to under
his or her national law;
(d) request information from any insolvency practitioner in respect of any member of the group where that information
is or might be of use when identifying and outlining strategies and measures in order to coordinate the proceedings;
and
(e) request a stay for a period of up to 6 months of the proceedings opened in respect of any member of the group,
provided that such a stay is necessary in order to ensure the proper implementation of the plan and would be to the
benefit of the creditors in the proceedings for which the stay is requested; or request the lifting of any existing stay.
Such a request shall be made to the court that opened the proceedings for which a stay is requested.
3.
The plan referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 shall not include recommendations as to any consolidation of
proceedings or insolvency estates.
4.
The coordinator's tasks and rights as defined under this Article shall not extend to any member of the group not
participating in group coordination proceedings.
5.
The coordinator shall perform his or her duties impartially and with due care.
6.
Where the coordinator considers that the fulfilment of his or her tasks requires a significant increase in the costs
compared to the cost estimate referred to in point (d) of Article 61(3), and in any case, where the costs exceed 10 % of
the estimated costs, the coordinator shall:
(a) inform without delay the participating insolvency practitioners; and
(b) seek the prior approval of the court opening group coordination proceedings.
Article 73
Languages
1.
The coordinator shall communicate with the insolvency practitioner of a participating group member in the
language agreed with the insolvency practitioner or, in the absence of an agreement, in the official language or one of
the official languages of the institutions of the Union, and of the court which opened the proceedings in respect of that
group member.
2.
The coordinator shall communicate with a court in the official language applicable to that court.
Article 74
Cooperation between insolvency practitioners and the coordinator
1.
Insolvency practitioners appointed in relation to members of a group and the coordinator shall cooperate with
each other to the extent that such cooperation is not incompatible with the rules applicable to the respective
proceedings.
2.
In particular, insolvency practitioners shall communicate any information that is relevant for the coordinator to
perform his or her tasks.L 141/54
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 75
Revocation of the appointment of the coordinator
The court shall revoke the appointment of the coordinator of its own motion or at the request of the insolvency
practitioner of a participating group member where:
(a) the coordinator acts to the detriment of the creditors of a participating group member; or
(b) the coordinator fails to comply with his or her obligations under this Chapter.
Article 76
Debtor in possession
The provisions applicable, under this Chapter, to the insolvency practitioner shall also apply, where appropriate, to the
debtor in possession.
Article 77
Costs and distribution
1.
The remuneration for the coordinator shall be adequate, proportionate to the tasks fulfilled and reflect reasonable
expenses.
2.
On having completed his or her tasks, the coordinator shall establish the final statement of costs and the share to
be paid by each member, and submit this statement to each participating insolvency practitioner and to the court
opening coordination proceedings.
3.
In the absence of objections by the insolvency practitioners within 30 days of receipt of the statement referred to
in paragraph 2, the costs and the share to be paid by each member shall be deemed to be agreed. The statement shall be
submitted to the court opening coordination proceedings for confirmation.
4.
In the event of an objection, the court that opened the group coordination proceedings shall, upon the application
of the coordinator or any participating insolvency practitioner, decide on the costs and the share to be paid by each
member in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 1 of this Article, and taking into account the estimation of
costs referred to in Article 68(1) and, where applicable, Article 72(6).
5.
Any participating insolvency practitioner may challenge the decision referred to in paragraph 4 in accordance with
the procedure set out under the law of the Member State where group coordination proceedings have been opened.
CHAPTER VI
DATA PROTECTION
Article 78
Data protection
1.
National rules implementing Directive 95/46/EC shall apply to the processing of personal data carried out in the
Member States pursuant to this Regulation, provided that processing operations referred to in Article 3(2) of Directive
95/46/EC are not concerned.
2.
Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 shall apply to the processing of personal data carried out by the Commission
pursuant to this Regulation.
Article 79
Responsibilities of Member States regarding the processing of personal data in national insolvency registers
1.
Each Member State shall communicate to the Commission the name of the natural or legal person, public
authority, agency or any other body designated by national law to exercise the functions of controller in accordance
with point (d) of Article 2 of Directive 95/46/EC, with a view to its publication on the European e-Justice Portal.5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/55
2.
Member States shall ensure that the technical measures for ensuring the security of personal data processed in their
national insolvency registers referred to in Article 24 are implemented.
3.
Member States shall be responsible for verifying that the controller, designated by national law in accordance with
point (d) of Article 2 of Directive 95/46/EC, ensures compliance with the principles of data quality, in particular the
accuracy and the updating of data stored in national insolvency registers.
4.
Member States shall be responsible, in accordance with Directive 95/46/EC, for the collection and storage of data
in national databases and for decisions taken to make such data available in the interconnected register that can be
consulted via the European e-Justice Portal.
5.
As part of the information that should be provided to data subjects to enable them to exercise their rights, and in
particular the right to the erasure of data, Member States shall inform data subjects of the accessibility period set for
personal data stored in insolvency registers.
Article 80
Responsibilities of the Commission in connection with the processing of personal data
1.
The Commission shall exercise the responsibilities of controller pursuant to Article 2(d) of Regulation (EC)
No 45/2001 in accordance with its respective responsibilities defined in this Article.
2.
The Commission shall define the necessary policies and apply the necessary technical solutions to fulfil its respon­
sibilities within the scope of the function of controller.
3.
The Commission shall implement the technical measures required to ensure the security of personal data while in
transit, in particular the confidentiality and integrity of any transmission to and from the European e-Justice Portal.
4.
The obligations of the Commission shall not affect the responsibilities of the Member States and other bodies for
the content and operation of the interconnected national databases run by them.
Article 81
Information obligations
Without prejudice to the information to be given to data subjects in accordance with Articles 11 and 12 of Regulation
(EC) No 45/2001, the Commission shall inform data subjects, by means of publication through the European e-Justice
Portal, about its role in the processing of data and the purposes for which those data will be processed.
Article 82
Storage of personal data
As regards information from interconnected national databases, no personal data relating to data subjects shall be stored
in the European e-Justice Portal. All such data shall be stored in the national databases operated by the Member States or
other bodies.
Article 83
Access to personal data via the European e-Justice Portal
Personal data stored in the national insolvency registers referred to in Article 24 shall be accessible via the European
e-Justice Portal for as long as they remain accessible under national law.L 141/56
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
CHAPTER VII
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 84
Applicability in time
1.
The provisions of this Regulation shall apply only to insolvency proceedings opened after 26 June 2017. Acts
committed by a debtor before that date shall continue to be governed by the law which was applicable to them at the
time they were committed.
2.
Notwithstanding Article 91 of this Regulation, Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000 shall continue to apply to
insolvency proceedings which fall within the scope of that Regulation and which have been opened before 26 June
2017.
Article 85
Relationship to Conventions
1.
This Regulation replaces, in respect of the matters referred to therein, and as regards relations between Member
States, the Conventions concluded between two or more Member States, in particular:
(a)
the Convention between Belgium and France on Jurisdiction and the Validity and Enforcement of Judgments,
Arbitration Awards and Authentic Instruments, signed at Paris on 8 July 1899;
(b) the Convention between Belgium and Austria on Bankruptcy, Winding-up, Arrangements, Compositions and
Suspension of Payments (with Additional Protocol of 13 June 1973), signed at Brussels on 16 July 1969;
(c)
the Convention between Belgium and the Netherlands on Territorial Jurisdiction, Bankruptcy and the Validity and
Enforcement of Judgments, Arbitration Awards and Authentic Instruments, signed at Brussels on 28 March 1925;
(d) the Treaty between Germany and Austria on Bankruptcy, Winding-up, Arrangements and Compositions, signed at
Vienna on 25 May 1979;
(e)the Convention between France and Austria on Jurisdiction, Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments on
Bankruptcy, signed at Vienna on 27 February 1979;
(f)the Convention between France and Italy on the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters,
signed at Rome on 3 June 1930;
(g) the Convention between Italy and Austria on Bankruptcy, Winding-up, Arrangements and Compositions, signed at
Rome on 12 July 1977;
(h) the Convention between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of Germany on the Mutual
Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments and other Enforceable Instruments in Civil and Commercial Matters,
signed at The Hague on 30 August 1962;
(i)the Convention between the United Kingdom and the Kingdom of Belgium providing for the Reciprocal
Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, with Protocol, signed at Brussels on 2 May 1934;
(j)the Convention between Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Iceland on Bankruptcy, signed at Copenhagen on
7 November 1933;
(k) the European Convention on Certain International Aspects of Bankruptcy, signed at Istanbul on 5 June 1990;
(l)
the Convention between the Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kingdom of Greece on the Mutual
Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments, signed at Athens on 18 June 1959;
(m) the Agreement between the Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Austria on the Mutual
Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards and Arbitral Settlements in Commercial Matters, signed at
Belgrade on 18 March 1960;5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/57
(n) the Convention between the Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia and the Italian Republic on Mutual Judicial
Cooperation in Civil and Administrative Matters, signed at Rome on 3 December 1960;
(o) the Agreement between the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kingdom of Belgium on Judicial
Cooperation in Civil and Commercial Matters, signed at Belgrade on 24 September 1971;
(p) the Convention between the Governments of Yugoslavia and France on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, signed at Paris on 18 May 1971;
(q) the Agreement between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Hellenic Republic on Legal Aid in Civil and
Criminal Matters, signed at Athens on 22 October 1980, still in force between the Czech Republic and Greece;
(r)the Agreement between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Republic of Cyprus on Legal Aid in Civil and
Criminal Matters, signed at Nicosia on 23 April 1982, still in force between the Czech Republic and Cyprus;
(s)the Treaty between the Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Government of the Republic of
France on Legal Aid and the Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil, Family and Commercial Matters,
signed at Paris on 10 May 1984, still in force between the Czech Republic and France;
(t)the Treaty between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Italian Republic on Legal Aid in Civil and Criminal
Matters, signed at Prague on 6 December 1985, still in force between the Czech Republic and Italy;
(u) the Agreement between the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Estonia and the Republic of Lithuania on Legal
Assistance and Legal Relationships, signed at Tallinn on 11 November 1992;
(v) the Agreement between Estonia and Poland on Granting Legal Aid and Legal Relations on Civil, Labour and
Criminal Matters, signed at Tallinn on 27 November 1998;
(w) the Agreement between the Republic of Lithuania and the Republic of Poland on Legal Assistance and Legal
Relations in Civil, Family, Labour and Criminal Matters, signed at Warsaw on 26 January 1993;
(x) the Convention between the Socialist Republic of Romania and the Hellenic Republic on legal assistance in civil
and criminal matters and its Protocol, signed at Bucharest on 19 October 1972;
(y) the Convention between the Socialist Republic of Romania and the French Republic on legal assistance in civil and
commercial matters, signed at Paris on 5 November 1974;
(z) the Agreement between the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the Hellenic Republic on Legal Assistance in Civil and
Criminal Matters, signed at Athens on 10 April 1976;
(aa) the Agreement between the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cyprus on Legal Assistance in Civil
and Criminal Matters, signed at Nicosia on 29 April 1983;
(ab) the Agreement between the Government of the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the Government of the French
Republic on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil Matters, signed at Sofia on 18 January 1989;
(ac) the Treaty between Romania and the Czech Republic on judicial assistance in civil matters, signed at Bucharest on
11 July 1994;
(ad) the Treaty between Romania and the Republic of Poland on legal assistance and legal relations in civil cases, signed
at Bucharest on 15 May 1999.
2.
The Conventions referred to in paragraph 1 shall continue to have effect with regard to proceedings opened before
the entry into force of Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000.
3.
This Regulation shall not apply:
(a) in any Member State, to the extent that it is irreconcilable with the obligations arising in relation to bankruptcy
from a convention concluded by that Member State with one or more third countries before the entry into force of
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000;
(b) in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to the extent that is irreconcilable with the obligations
arising in relation to bankruptcy and the winding-up of insolvent companies from any arrangements with the
Commonwealth existing at the time Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000 entered into force.L 141/58
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
5.6.2015
Article 86
Information on national and Union insolvency law
1.
The Member States shall provide, within the framework of the European Judicial Network in civil and commercial
matters established by Council Decision 2001/470/EC (1), and with a view to making the information available to the
public, a short description of their national legislation and procedures relating to insolvency, in particular relating to the
matters listed in Article 7(2).
2.The Member States shall update the information referred to in paragraph 1 regularly.
3.The Commission shall make information concerning this Regulation available to the public.
Article 87
Establishment of the interconnection of registers
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing the interconnection of insolvency registers as referred to in
Article 25. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
Article 89(3).
Article 88
Establishment and subsequent amendment of standard forms
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts establishing and, where necessary, amending the forms referred to in
Article 27(4), Articles 54 and 55 and Article 64(2). Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
advisory procedure referred to in Article 89(2).
Article 89
Committee procedure
1.
The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
2.Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
3.Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
Article 90
Review clause
1.
No later than 27 June 2027, and every 5 years thereafter, the Commission shall present to the European
Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee a report on the application of this
Regulation. The report shall be accompanied where necessary by a proposal for adaptation of this Regulation.
2.
No later than 27 June 2022, the Commission shall present to the European Parliament, the Council and the
European Economic and Social Committee a report on the application of the group coordination proceedings. The
report shall be accompanied where necessary by a proposal for adaptation of this Regulation.
3.
No later than 1 January 2016, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, the Council and the
European Economic and Social Committee a study on the cross-border issues in the area of directors' liability and
disqualifications.
4.
No later than 27 June 2020, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament, the Council and the
European Economic and Social Committee a study on the issue of abusive forum shopping.
(1) Council Decision 2001/470/EC of 28 May 2001 establishing a European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 174,
27.6.2001, p. 25).5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/59
Article 91
Repeal
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000 is repealed.
References to the repealed Regulation shall be construed as references to this Regulation and shall be read in accordance
with the correlation table set out in Annex D to this Regulation.
Article 92
Entry into force
This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the
European Union.
It shall apply from 26 June 2017, with the exception of:
(a) Article 86, which shall apply from 26 June 2016;
(b) Article 24(1), which shall apply from 26 June 2018; and
(c) Article 25, which shall apply from 26 June 2019.
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in the Member States in
accordance with the Treaties.
Done at Strasbourg, 20 May 2015.
For the European ParliamentFor the Council
The PresidentThe President
M. SCHULZZ. KALNIŅA-LUKAŠEVICAL 141/60
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
5.6.2015
ANNEX A
Insolvency proceedings referred to in point (4) of Article 2
BELGIQUE/BELGIË
— Het faillissement/La faillite,
— De gerechtelijke reorganisatie door een collectief akkoord/La réorganisation judiciaire par accord collectif,
— De gerechtelijke reorganisatie door een minnelijk akkoord/La réorganisation judiciaire par accord amiable,
— De gerechtelijke reorganisatie door overdracht onder gerechtelijk gezag/La réorganisation judiciaire par transfert sous
autorité de justice,
— De collectieve schuldenregeling/Le règlement collectif de dettes,
— De vrijwillige vereffening/La liquidation volontaire,
— De gerechtelijke vereffening/La liquidation judiciaire,
— De voorlopige ontneming van beheer, bepaald in artikel 8 van de faillissementswet/Le dessaisissement provisoire, visé
à l'article 8 de la loi sur les faillites,
БЪЛГАРИЯ
— Производство по несъстоятелност,
ČESKÁ REPUBLIKA
— Konkurs,
— Reorganizace,
— Oddlužení,
DEUTSCHLAND
— Das Konkursverfahren,
— Das gerichtliche Vergleichsverfahren,
— Das Gesamtvollstreckungsverfahren,
— Das Insolvenzverfahren,
EESTI
— Pankrotimenetlus,
— Võlgade ümberkujundamise menetlus,
ÉIRE/IRELAND
— Compulsory winding-up by the court,
— Bankruptcy,
— The administration in bankruptcy of the estate of persons dying insolvent,
— Winding-up in bankruptcy of partnerships,
— Creditors' voluntary winding-up (with confirmation of a court),
— Arrangements under the control of the court which involve the vesting of all or part of the property of the debtor
in the Official Assignee for realisation and distribution,
— Examinership,
— Debt Relief Notice,
— Debt Settlement Arrangement,
— Personal Insolvency Arrangement,5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/61
ΕΛΛΑΔΑ
— Η πτώχευση,
— Η ειδική εκκαθάριση εν λειτουργία,
— Σχέδιο αναδιοργάνωσης,
— Απλοποιημένη διαδικασία επί πτωχεύσεων μικρού αντικειμένου,
— Διαδικασία Εξυγίανσης,
ESPAÑA
— Concurso,
— Procedimiento de homologación de acuerdos de refinanciación,
— Procedimiento de acuerdos extrajudiciales de pago,
— Procedimiento de negociación pública para la consecución de acuerdos de refinanciación colectivos, acuerdos de
refinanciación homologados y propuestas anticipadas de convenio,
FRANCE
— Sauvegarde,
— Sauvegarde accélérée,
— Sauvegarde financière accélérée,
— Redressement judiciaire,
— Liquidation judiciaire,
HRVATSKA
— Stečajni postupak,
ITALIA
— Fallimento,
— Concordato preventivo,
— Liquidazione coatta amministrativa,
— Amministrazione straordinaria,
— Accordi di ristrutturazione,
— Procedure di composizione della crisi da sovraindebitamento del consumatore (accordo o piano),
— Liquidazione dei beni,
ΚΥΠΡΟΣ
— Υποχρεωτική εκκαθάριση από το Δικαστήριο,
— Εκούσια εκκαθάριση από μέλη,
— Εκούσια εκκαθάριση από πιστωτές
— Εκκαθάριση με την εποπτεία του Δικαστηρίου,
— Διάταγμα Παραλαβής και πτώχευσης κατόπιν Δικαστικού Διατάγματος,
— Διαχείριση της περιουσίας προσώπων που απεβίωσαν αφερέγγυα,
LATVIJA
— Tiesiskās aizsardzības process,
— Juridiskās personas maksātnespējas process,
— Fiziskās personas maksātnespējas process,L 141/62
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
LIETUVA
— Įmonės restruktūrizavimo byla,
— Įmonės bankroto byla,
— Įmonės bankroto procesas ne teismo tvarka,
— Fizinio asmens bankroto procesas,
LUXEMBOURG
— Faillite,
— Gestion contrôlée,
— Concordat préventif de faillite (par abandon d'actif),
— Régime spécial de liquidation du notariat,
— Procédure de règlement collectif des dettes dans le cadre du surendettement,
MAGYARORSZÁG
— Csődeljárás,
— Felszámolási eljárás,
MALTA
— Xoljiment,
— Amministrazzjoni,
— Stralċ volontarju mill-membri jew mill-kredituri,
— Stralċ mill-Qorti,
— Falliment f'każ ta' kummerċjant,
— Proċedura biex kumpanija tirkupra,
NEDERLAND
— Het faillissement,
— De surséance van betaling,
— De schuldsaneringsregeling natuurlijke personen,
ÖSTERREICH
— Das Konkursverfahren (Insolvenzverfahren),
— Das Sanierungsverfahren ohne Eigenverwaltung (Insolvenzverfahren),
— Das Sanierungsverfahren mit Eigenverwaltung (Insolvenzverfahren),
— Das Schuldenregulierungsverfahren,
— Das Abschöpfungsverfahren,
— Das Ausgleichsverfahren,
POLSKA
— Postępowanie naprawcze,
— Upadłość obejmująca likwidację,
— Upadłość z możliwością zawarcia układu,
PORTUGAL
— Processo de insolvência,
— Processo especial de revitalização,
5.6.20155.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
ROMÂNIA
— Procedura insolvenței,
— Reorganizarea judiciară,
— Procedura falimentului,
— Concordatul preventiv,
SLOVENIJA
— Postopek preventivnega prestrukturiranja,
— Postopek prisilne poravnave,
— Postopek poenostavljene prisilne poravnave,
— Stečajni postopek: stečajni postopek nad pravno osebo, postopek osebnega stečaja and postopek stečaja zapuščine,
SLOVENSKO
— Konkurzné konanie,
— Reštrukturalizačné konanie,
— Oddlženie,
SUOMI/FINLAND
— Konkurssi/konkurs,
— Yrityssaneeraus/företagssanering,
— Yksityishenkilön velkajärjestely/skuldsanering för privatpersoner,
SVERIGE
— Konkurs,
— Företagsrekonstruktion,
— Skuldsanering,
UNITED KINGDOM
— Winding-up by or subject to the supervision of the court,
— Creditors' voluntary winding-up (with confirmation by the court),
— Administration, including appointments made by filing prescribed documents with the court,
— Voluntary arrangements under insolvency legislation,
— Bankruptcy or sequestration.
L 141/63L 141/64
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
ANNEX B
Insolvency practitioners referred to in point (5) of Article 2
BELGIQUE/BELGIË
— De curator/Le curateur,
— De gedelegeerd rechter/Le juge-délégué,
— De gerechtsmandataris/Le mandataire de justice,
— De schuldbemiddelaar/Le médiateur de dettes,
— De vereffenaar/Le liquidateur,
— De voorlopige bewindvoerder/L'administrateur provisoire,
БЪЛГАРИЯ
— Назначен предварително временен синдик,
— Временен синдик,
— (Постоянен) синдик,
— Служебен синдик,
ČESKÁ REPUBLIKA
— Insolvenční správce,
— Předběžný insolvenční správce,
— Oddělený insolvenční správce,
— Zvláštní insolvenční správce,
— Zástupce insolvenčního správce,
DEUTSCHLAND
— Konkursverwalter,
— Vergleichsverwalter,
— Sachwalter (nach der Vergleichsordnung),
— Verwalter,
— Insolvenzverwalter,
— Sachwalter (nach der Insolvenzordnung),
— Treuhänder,
— Vorläufiger Insolvenzverwalter,
— Vorläufiger Sachwalter,
EESTI
— Pankrotihaldur,
— Ajutine pankrotihaldur,
— Usaldusisik,
ÉIRE/IRELAND
— Liquidator,
— Official Assignee,
— Trustee in bankruptcy,
5.6.20155.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/65
— Provisional Liquidator,
— Examiner,
— Personal Insolvency Practitioner,
— Insolvency Service,
ΕΛΛΑΔΑ
— Ο σύνδικος,
— Ο εισηγητής,
— Η επιτροπή των πιστωτών,
— Ο ειδικός εκκαθαριστής,
ESPAÑA
— Administrador concursal,
— Mediador concursal,
FRANCE
— Mandataire judiciaire,
— Liquidateur,
— Administrateur judiciaire,
— Commissaire à l'exécution du plan,
HRVATSKA
— Stečajni upravitelj,
— Privremeni stečajni upravitelj,
— Stečajni povjerenik,
— Povjerenik,
ITALIA
— Curatore,
— Commissario giudiziale,
— Commissario straordinario,
— Commissario liquidatore,
— Liquidatore giudiziale,
— Professionista nominato dal Tribunale,
— Organismo di composizione della crisi nella procedura di composizione della crisi da sovraindebitamento del
consumatore,
— Liquidatore,
ΚΥΠΡΟΣ
— Εκκαθαριστής και Προσωρινός Εκκαθαριστής,
— Επίσημος Παραλήπτης,
— Διαχειριστής της Πτώχευσης,
LATVIJA
— Maksātnespējas procesa administrators,L 141/66
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
LIETUVA
— Bankroto administratorius,
— Restruktūrizavimo administratorius,
LUXEMBOURG
— Le curateur,
— Le commissaire,
— Le liquidateur,
— Le conseil de gérance de la section d'assainissement du notariat,
— Le liquidateur dans le cadre du surendettement,
MAGYARORSZÁG
— Vagyonfelügyelő,
— Felszámoló,
MALTA
— Amministratur Proviżorju,
— Riċevitur Uffiċjali,
— Stralċjarju,
— Manager Speċjali,
— Kuraturi f'każ ta' proċeduri ta' falliment,
— Kontrolur Speċjali,
NEDERLAND
— De curator in het faillissement,
— De bewindvoerder in de surséance van betaling,
— De bewindvoerder in de schuldsaneringsregeling natuurlijke personen,
ÖSTERREICH
— Masseverwalter,
— Sanierungsverwalter,
— Ausgleichsverwalter,
— Besonderer Verwalter,
— Einstweiliger Verwalter,
— Sachwalter,
— Treuhänder,
— Insolvenzgericht,
— Konkursgericht,
POLSKA
— Syndyk,
— Nadzorca sądowy,
— Zarządca,
5.6.20155.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
PORTUGAL
— Administrador da insolvência,
— Administrador judicial provisório,
ROMÂNIA
— Practician în insolvență,
— Administrator concordatar,
— Administrator judiciar,
— Lichidator judiciar,
SLOVENIJA
— Upravitelj,
SLOVENSKO
— Predbežný správca,
— Správca,
SUOMI/FINLAND
— Pesänhoitaja/boförvaltare,
— Selvittäjä/utredare,
SVERIGE
— Förvaltare,
— Rekonstruktör,
UNITED KINGDOM
— Liquidator,
— Supervisor of a voluntary arrangement,
— Administrator,
— Official Receiver,
— Trustee,
— Provisional Liquidator,
— Interim Receiver,
— Judicial factor.
L 141/67L 141/68
Official Journal of the European Union
EN
5.6.2015
ANNEX C
Repealed Regulation with list of the successive amendments thereto
Council Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000
(OJ L 160, 30.6.2000, p. 1)
Council Regulation (EC) No 603/2005
(OJ L 100, 20.4.2005, p. 1)
Council Regulation (EC) No 694/2006
(OJ L 121, 6.5.2006, p. 1)
Council Regulation (EC) No 1791/2006
(OJ L 363, 20.12.2006, p. 1)
Council Regulation (EC) No 681/2007
(OJ L 159, 20.6.2007, p. 1)
Council Regulation (EC) No 788/2008
(OJ L 213, 8.8.2008, p. 1)
Implementing Regulation of the Council (EU) No 210/2010
(OJ L 65, 13.3.2010, p. 1)
Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 583/2011
(OJ L 160, 18.6.2011, p. 52)
Council Regulation (EU) No 517/2013
(OJ L 158, 10.6.2013, p. 1)
Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 663/2014
(OJ L 179, 19.6.2014, p. 4)
Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the
Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland,
the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is
founded
(OJ L 236, 23.9.2003, p. 33)5.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
L 141/69
ANNEX D
Correlation table
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000
This Regulation
Article 1Article 1
Article 2, introductory wordsArticle 2, introductory words
Article 2, point (a)Article 2, point (4)
Article 2, point (b)Article 2, point (5)
Article 2, point (c)—
Article 2, point (d)Article 2, point (6)
Article 2, point (e)Article 2, point (7)
Article 2, point (f)Article 2, point (8)
Article 2, point (g), introductory wordsArticle 2, point (9), introductory words
Article 2, point (g), first indentArticle 2, point (9)(vii)
Article 2, point (g), second indentArticle 2, point (9)(iv)
Article 2, point (g), third indentArticle 2, point (9)(viii)
Article 2, point (h)Article 2, point 10
—Article 2, points (1) to (3) and (11) to (13)
—Article 2, point (9)(i) to (iii), (v), (vi)
Article 3Article 3
—Article 4
—Article 5
—Article 6
Article 4Article 7
Article 5Article 8
Article 6Article 9
Article 7Article 10
Article 8Article 11(1)
—Article 11(2)
Article 9Article 12
Article 10Article 13(1)
—Article 13(2)
Article 11Article 14
Article 12Article 15
Article 13, first indentArticle 16, point (a)
Article 13, second indentArticle 16, point (b)
Article 14, first indentArticle 17, point (a)
Article 14, second indentArticle 17, point (b)L 141/70
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000
5.6.2015
This Regulation
Article 14, third indentArticle 17, point (c)
Article 15Article 18
Article 16Article 19
Article 17Article 20
Article 18Article 21
Article 19Article 22
Article 20Article 23
—Article 24
—Article 25
—Article 26
—Article 27
Article 21(1)Article 28(2)
Article 21(2)Article 28(1)
Article 22Article 29
Article 23Article 30
Article 24Article 31
Article 25Article 32
Article 26Article 33
Article 27Article 34
Article 28Article 35
—Article 36
Article 29Article 37(1)
—Article 37(2)
—Article 38
—Article 39
Article 30Article 40
Article 31Article 41
—Article 42
—Article 43
—Article 44
Article 32Article 45
Article 33Article 46
Article 34(1)Article 47(1)
Article 34(2)Article 47(2)
Article 34(3)—
—Article 48
Article 35Article 49
Article 36Article 50
Article 37Article 515.6.2015
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000
L 141/71
This Regulation
Article 38Article 52
Article 39Article 53
Article 40Article 54
Article 41Article 55
Article 42—
—Article 56
—Article 57
—Article 58
—Article 59
—Article 60
—Article 61
—Article 62
—Article 63
—Article 64
—Article 65
—Article 66
—Article 67
—Article 68
—Article 69
—Article 70
—Article 71
—Article 72
—Article 73
—Article 74
—Article 75
—Article 76
—Article 77
—Article 78
—Article 79
—Article 80
—Article 81
—Article 82
—Article 83
Article 43Article 84(1)
—Article 84(2)
Article 44Article 85
—Article 86
Article 45—
—Article 87
—Article 88L 141/72
EN
Official Journal of the European Union
Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000
—
5.6.2015
This Regulation
Article 89
Article 46Article 90(1)
—Article 90(2) to (4)
—Article 91
Article 47Article 92
Annex AAnnex A
Annex B—
Annex CAnnex B
—Annex C
—Annex D