L 304/64

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

22.11.2011

DIRECTIVES
DIRECTIVE 2011/83/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 25 October 2011
on consumer rights, amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85/577/EEC and
Directive 97/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
(Text with EEA relevance)

a single Directive. This Directive should therefore lay
down standard rules for the common aspects of
distance and off-premises contracts, moving away from
the minimum harmonisation approach in the former
Directives whilst allowing Member States to maintain
or adopt national rules in relation to certain aspects.

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

(3)

Article 169(1) and point (a) of Article 169(2) of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU) provide that the Union is to contribute to the
attainment of a high level of consumer protection
through the measures adopted pursuant to Article 114
thereof.

(4)

In accordance with Article 26(2) TFEU, the internal
market is to comprise an area without internal frontiers
in which the free movement of goods and services and
freedom of establishment are ensured. The harmonisation
of certain aspects of consumer distance and off-premises
contracts is necessary for the promotion of a real
consumer internal market striking the right balance
between a high level of consumer protection and the
competitiveness of enterprises, while ensuring respect
for the principle of subsidiarity.

(5)

The cross-border potential of distance selling, which
should be one of the main tangible results of the
internal market, is not fully exploited. Compared with
the significant growth of domestic distance sales over
the last few years, the growth in cross-border distance
sales has been limited. This discrepancy is particularly
significant for Internet sales for which the potential for
further growth is high. The cross-border potential of
contracts negotiated away from business premises
(direct selling) is constrained by a number of factors
including the different national consumer protection
rules imposed upon the industry. Compared with the
growth of domestic direct selling over the last few
years, in particular in the services sector, for instance
utilities, the number of consumers using this channel
for cross-border purchases has remained flat. Responding
to increased business opportunities in many Member
States, small and medium-sized enterprises (including
individual traders) or agents of direct selling companies

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and
Social Committee (1),

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the
Regions (2),

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (3),

Whereas:

(1)

(2)

Council Directive 85/577/EEC of 20 December 1985 to
protect the consumer in respect of contracts negotiated
away from business premises (4) and Directive 97/7/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May
1997 on the protection of consumers in respect of
distance contracts (5) lay down a number of contractual
rights for consumers.

Those Directives have been reviewed in the light of
experience with a view to simplifying and updating the
applicable rules, removing inconsistencies and closing
unwanted gaps in the rules. That review has shown
that it is appropriate to replace those two Directives by

(1) OJ C 317, 23.12.2009, p. 54.
(2) OJ C 200, 25.8.2009, p. 76.
(3) Position of the European Parliament of 23 June 2011 (not yet
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of
10 October 2011.
(4) OJ L 372, 31.12.1985, p. 31.
(5) OJ L 144, 4.6.1997, p. 19.

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

should be more inclined to seek business opportunities
in other Member States, in particular in border regions.
Therefore the full harmonisation of consumer
information and the right of withdrawal in distance
and off-premises contracts will contribute to a high
level of consumer protection and a better functioning
of the business-to-consumer internal market.

(6)

Certain disparities create significant internal market
barriers affecting traders and consumers. Those disparities
increase compliance costs to traders wishing to engage in
the cross-border sale of goods or provision of services.
Disproportionate fragmentation also undermines
consumer confidence in the internal market.

(7)

Full harmonisation of some key regulatory aspects should
considerably increase legal certainty for both consumers
and traders. Both consumers and traders should be able
to rely on a single regulatory framework based on clearly
defined legal concepts regulating certain aspects of
business-to-consumer contracts across the Union. The
effect of such harmonisation should be to eliminate the
barriers stemming from the fragmentation of the rules
and to complete the internal market in this area. Those
barriers can only be eliminated by establishing uniform
rules at Union level. Furthermore consumers should
enjoy a high common level of protection across the
Union.

(8)

The regulatory aspects to be harmonised should only
concern contracts concluded between traders and
consumers. Therefore, this Directive should not affect
national law in the area of contracts relating to
employment, contracts relating to succession rights,
contracts relating to family law and contracts relating
to the incorporation and organisation of companies or
partnership agreements.

(9)

This Directive establishes rules on information to be
provided for distance contracts, off-premises contracts
and contracts other than distance and off-premises
contracts. This Directive also regulates the right of with­
drawal for distance and off-premises contracts and
harmonises certain provisions dealing with the
performance and some other aspects of business-toconsumer contracts.

(10)

This Directive should be without prejudice to Regulation
(EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to
contractual obligations (Rome I) (1).

(1) OJ L 177, 4.7.2008, p. 6.

L 304/65

(11)

This Directive should be without prejudice to Union
provisions relating to specific sectors, such as medicinal
products for human use, medical devices, privacy and
electronic communications, patients’ rights in crossborder healthcare, food labelling and the internal
market for electricity and natural gas.

(12)

The information requirements provided for in this
Directive should complete the information requirements
of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on services
in the internal market (2) and Directive 2000/31/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June
2000 on certain legal aspects of information society
services, in particular electronic commerce, in the
Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’) (3).
Member States should retain the possibility to impose
additional information requirements applicable to
service providers established in their territory.

(13)

Member States should remain competent, in accordance
with Union law, to apply the provisions of this Directive
to areas not falling within its scope. Member States may
therefore maintain or introduce national legislation corre­
sponding to the provisions of this Directive, or certain of
its provisions, in relation to contracts that fall outside the
scope of this Directive. For instance, Member States may
decide to extend the application of the rules of this
Directive to legal persons or to natural persons who
are not consumers within the meaning of this Directive,
such as non-governmental organisations, start-ups or
small and medium-sized enterprises. Similarly, Member
States may apply the provisions of this Directive to
contracts that are not distance contracts within the
meaning of this Directive, for example because they are
not concluded under an organised distance sales or
service-provision scheme. Moreover, Member States may
also maintain or introduce national provisions on issues
not specifically addressed in this Directive, such as addi­
tional rules concerning sales contracts, including in
relation to the delivery of goods, or requirements for
the provision of information during the existence of a
contract.

(14)

This Directive should not affect national law in the area
of contract law for contract law aspects that are not
regulated by this Directive. Therefore, this Directive
should be without prejudice to national law regulating
for instance the conclusion or the validity of a contract
(for instance in the case of lack of consent). Similarly,
this Directive should not affect national law in relation to
the general contractual legal remedies, the rules on public
economic order, for instance rules on excessive or extor­
tionate prices, and the rules on unethical legal trans­
actions.

(2) OJ L 376, 27.12.2006, p. 36.
(3) OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1.

L 304/66

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(15)

This Directive should not harmonise language
requirements applicable to consumer contracts.
Therefore, Member States may maintain or introduce in
their national law language requirements regarding
contractual information and contractual terms.

(16)

This Directive should not affect national laws on legal
representation such as the rules relating to the person
who is acting in the name of the trader or on his behalf
(such as an agent or a trustee). Member States should
remain competent in this area. This Directive should
apply to all traders, whether public or private.

(17)

The definition of consumer should cover natural persons
who are acting outside their trade, business, craft or
profession. However, in the case of dual purpose
contracts, where the contract is concluded for purposes
partly within and partly outside the person’s trade and
the trade purpose is so limited as not to be predominant
in the overall context of the contract, that person should
also be considered as a consumer.

(18)

This Directive does not affect the freedom of Member
States to define, in conformity with Union law, what they
consider to be services of general economic interest, how
those services should be organised and financed, in
compliance with State aid rules, and which specific obli­
gations they should be subject to.

(19)

Digital content means data which are produced and
supplied in digital form, such as computer programs,
applications, games, music, videos or texts, irrespective
of whether they are accessed through downloading or
streaming, from a tangible medium or through any
other means. Contracts for the supply of digital content
should fall within the scope of this Directive. If digital
content is supplied on a tangible medium, such as a CD
or a DVD, it should be considered as goods within the
meaning of this Directive. Similarly to contracts for the
supply of water, gas or electricity, where they are not put
up for sale in a limited volume or set quantity, or of
district heating, contracts for digital content which is not
supplied on a tangible medium should be classified, for
the purpose of this Directive, neither as sales contracts
nor as service contracts. For such contracts, the
consumer should have a right of withdrawal unless he
has consented to the beginning of the performance of
the contract during the withdrawal period and has
acknowledged that he will consequently lose the right
to withdraw from the contract. In addition to the
general information requirements, the trader should
inform the consumer about the functionality and the
relevant interoperability of digital content. The notion
of functionality should refer to the ways in which
digital content can be used, for instance for the

22.11.2011

tracking of consumer behaviour; it should also refer to
the absence or presence of any technical restrictions such
as protection via Digital Rights Management or region
coding. The notion of relevant interoperability is meant
to describe the information regarding the standard
hardware and software environment with which the
digital content is compatible, for instance the operating
system, the necessary version and certain hardware
features. The Commission should examine the need for
further harmonisation of provisions in respect of digital
content and submit, if necessary, a legislative proposal
for addressing this matter.

(20)

The definition of distance contract should cover all cases
where a contract is concluded between the trader and the
consumer under an organised distance sales or serviceprovision scheme, with the exclusive use of one or more
means of distance communication (such as mail order,
Internet, telephone or fax) up to and including the time
at which the contract is concluded. That definition
should also cover situations where the consumer visits
the business premises merely for the purpose of
gathering information about the goods or services and
subsequently negotiates and concludes the contract at a
distance. By contrast, a contract which is negotiated at
the business premises of the trader and finally concluded
by means of distance communication should not be
considered a distance contract. Neither should a
contract initiated by means of distance communication,
but finally concluded at the business premises of the
trader be considered a distance contract. Similarly, the
concept of distance contract should not include reser­
vations made by a consumer through a means of
distance communications to request the provision of a
service from a professional, such as in the case of a
consumer phoning to request an appointment with a
hairdresser. The notion of an organised distance sales
or service-provision scheme should include those
schemes offered by a third party other than the trader
but used by the trader, such as an online platform. It
should not, however, cover cases where websites merely
offer information on the trader, his goods and/or services
and his contact details.

(21)

An off-premises contract should be defined as a contract
concluded with the simultaneous physical presence of the
trader and the consumer, in a place which is not the
business premises of the trader, for example at the
consumer’s home or workplace. In an off-premises
context, the consumer may be under potential psycho­
logical pressure or may be confronted with an element of
surprise, irrespective of whether or not the consumer has
solicited the trader’s visit. The definition of an offpremises contract should also include situations where
the consumer is personally and individually addressed
in an off-premises context but the contract is
concluded immediately afterwards on the business
premises of the trader or through a means of distance
communication. The definition of an off-premises
contract should not cover situations in which the

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

trader first comes to the consumer’s home strictly with a
view to taking measurements or giving an estimate
without any commitment of the consumer and where
the contract is then concluded only at a later point in
time on the business premises of the trader or via means
of distance communication on the basis of the trader’s
estimate. In those cases, the contract is not to be
considered as having been concluded immediately after
the trader has addressed the consumer if the consumer
has had time to reflect upon the estimate of the trader
before concluding the contract. Purchases made during
an excursion organised by the trader during which the
products acquired are promoted and offered for sale
should be considered as off-premises contracts.

(22)

Durable media should enable the consumer to store the
information for as long as it is necessary for him to
protect his interests stemming from his relationship
with the trader. Such media should include in particular
paper, USB sticks, CD-ROMs, DVDs, memory cards or
the hard disks of computers as well as e-mails.

(24)

A public auction implies that traders and consumers
attend or are given the possibility to attend the auction
in person. The goods or services are offered by the trader
to the consumer through a bidding procedure authorised
by law in some Member States, to offer goods or services
at public sale. The successful bidder is bound to purchase
the goods or services. The use of online platforms for
auction purposes which are at the disposal of consumers
and traders should not be considered as a public auction
within the meaning of this Directive.

(25)

water, gas or electricity. District heating refers to the
supply of heat, inter alia, in the form of steam or hot
water, from a central source of production through a
transmission and distribution system to multiple
buildings, for the purpose of heating.

(26)

Contracts related to the transfer of immovable property
or of rights in immovable property or to the creation or
acquisition of such immovable property or rights,
contracts for the construction of new buildings or the
substantial conversion of existing buildings as well as
contracts for the rental of accommodation for residential
purposes are already subject to a number of specific
requirements in national legislation. Those contracts
include for instance sales of immovable property still
to be developed and hire-purchase. The provisions of
this Directive are not appropriate to those contracts,
which should be therefore excluded from its scope. A
substantial conversion is a conversion comparable to
the construction of a new building, for example where
only the façade of an old building is retained. Service
contracts in particular those related to the construction
of annexes to buildings (for example a garage or a
veranda) and those related to repair and renovation of
buildings other than substantial conversion, should be
included in the scope of this Directive, as well as
contracts related to the services of a real estate agent
and those related to the rental of accommodation for
non-residential purposes.

(27)

Transport services cover passenger transport and
transport of goods. Passenger transport should be
excluded from the scope of this Directive as it is
already subject to other Union legislation or, in the
case of public transport and taxis, to regulation at
national level. However, the provisions of this Directive
protecting consumers against excessive fees for the use of
means of payment or against hidden costs should apply
also to passenger transport contracts. In relation to
transport of goods and car rental which are services,
consumers should benefit from the protection afforded
by this Directive, with the exception of the right of with­
drawal.

(28)

In order to avoid administrative burden being placed on
traders, Member States may decide not to apply this
Directive where goods or services of a minor value are
sold off-premises. The monetary threshold should be
established at a sufficiently low level as to exclude only
purchases of small significance. Member States should be
allowed to define this value in their national legislation
provided that it does not exceed EUR 50. Where two or
more contracts with related subjects are concluded at the
same time by the consumer, the total cost thereof should
be taken into account for the purpose of applying this
threshold.

Business premises should include premises in whatever
form (such as shops, stalls or lorries) which serve as a
permanent or usual place of business for the trader.
Market stalls and fair stands should be treated as
business premises if they fulfil this condition. Retail
premises where the trader carries out his activity on a
seasonal basis, for instance during the tourist season at a
ski or beach resort, should be considered as business
premises as the trader carries out his activity in those
premises on a usual basis. Spaces accessible to the
public, such as streets, shopping malls, beaches, sports
facilities and public transport, which the trader uses on
an exceptional basis for his business activities as well as
private homes or workplaces should not be regarded as
business premises. The business premises of a person
acting in the name or on behalf of the trader as
defined in this Directive should be considered as
business premises within the meaning of this Directive.

(23)

Contracts related to district heating should be covered by
this Directive, similarly to the contracts for the supply of

L 304/67

L 304/68

(29)

(30)

(31)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Social services have fundamentally distinct features that
are reflected in sector-specific legislation, partially at
Union level and partially at national level. Social
services include, on the one hand, services for particularly
disadvantaged or low income persons as well as services
for persons and families in need of assistance in carrying
out routine, everyday tasks and, on the other hand,
services for all people who have a special need for
assistance, support, protection or encouragement in a
specific life phase. Social services cover, inter alia,
services for children and youth, assistance services for
families, single parents and older persons, and services
for migrants. Social services cover both short-term and
long-term care services, for instance services provided by
home care services or provided in assisted living facilities
and residential homes or housing (‘nursing homes’).
Social services include not only those provided by the
State at a national, regional or local level by providers
mandated by the State or by charities recognised by the
State but also those provided by private operators. The
provisions of this Directive are not appropriate to social
services which should be therefore excluded from its
scope.

Healthcare requires special regulations because of its
technical complexity, its importance as a service of
general interest as well as its extensive public funding.
Healthcare is defined in Directive 2011/24/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March
2011 on the application of patients’ rights in crossborder healthcare (1) as ‘health services provided by
health professionals to patients to assess, maintain or
restore their state of health, including the prescription,
dispensation and provision of medicinal products and
medical devices’. Health professional is defined in that
Directive as a doctor of medicine, a nurse responsible
for general care, a dental practitioner, a midwife or a
pharmacist within the meaning of Directive 2005/36/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of
7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional
qualifications (2) or another professional exercising
activities in the healthcare sector which are restricted to
a regulated profession as defined in point (a) of
Article 3(1) of Directive 2005/36/EC, or a person
considered to be a health professional according to the
legislation of the Member State of treatment. The
provisions of this Directive are not appropriate to
healthcare which should be therefore excluded from its
scope.

Gambling should be excluded from the scope of this
Directive. Gambling activities are those which involve
wagering at stake with pecuniary value in games of
chance, including lotteries, gambling in casinos and
betting transactions. Member States should be able to
adopt other, including more stringent, consumer
protection measures in relation to such activities.

(1) OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 45.
(2) OJ L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 22.

22.11.2011

(32)

The existing Union legislation, inter alia, relating to
consumer financial services, package travel and
timeshare contains numerous rules on consumer
protection. For this reason, this Directive should not
apply to contracts in those areas. With regard to
financial services, Member States should be encouraged
to draw inspiration from existing Union legislation in
that area when legislating in areas not regulated at
Union level, in such a way that a level playing field for
all consumers and all contracts relating to financial
services is ensured.

(33)

The trader should be obliged to inform the consumer in
advance of any arrangement resulting in the consumer
paying a deposit to the trader, including an arrangement
whereby an amount is blocked on the consumer’s credit
or debit card.

(34)

The trader should give the consumer clear and compre­
hensible information before the consumer is bound by a
distance or off-premises contract, a contract other than a
distance or an off-premises contract, or any corre­
sponding offer. In providing that information, the
trader should take into account the specific needs of
consumers who are particularly vulnerable because of
their mental, physical or psychological infirmity, age or
credulity in a way which the trader could reasonably be
expected to foresee. However, taking into account such
specific needs should not lead to different levels of
consumer protection.

(35)

The information to be provided by the trader to the
consumer should be mandatory and should not be
altered. Nevertheless, the contracting parties should be
able to expressly agree to change the content of the
contract subsequently concluded, for instance the
arrangements for delivery.

(36)

In the case of distance contracts, the information
requirements should be adapted to take into account
the technical constraints of certain media, such as the
restrictions on the number of characters on certain
mobile telephone screens or the time constraint on
television sales spots. In such cases the trader should
comply with a minimum set of information requirements
and refer the consumer to another source of information,
for instance by providing a toll free telephone number or
a hypertext link to a webpage of the trader where the
relevant information is directly available and easily
accessible. As to the requirement to inform the
consumer of the cost of returning goods which by
their nature cannot normally be returned by post, it
will be considered to have been met, for example, if
the trader specifies one carrier (for instance the one he
assigned for the delivery of the good) and one price
concerning the cost of returning the goods. Where the

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

cost of returning the goods cannot reasonably be
calculated in advance by the trader, for example
because the trader does not offer to arrange for the
return of the goods himself, the trader should provide
a statement that such a cost will be payable, and that this
cost may be high, along with a reasonable estimation of
the maximum cost, which could be based on the cost of
delivery to the consumer.

(37)

Since in the case of distance sales, the consumer is not
able to see the goods before concluding the contract, he
should have a right of withdrawal. For the same reason,
the consumer should be allowed to test and inspect the
goods he has bought to the extent necessary to establish
the nature, characteristics and the functioning of the
goods. Concerning off-premises contracts, the consumer
should have the right of withdrawal because of the
potential surprise element and/or psychological
pressure. Withdrawal from the contract should
terminate the obligation of the contracting parties to
perform the contract.

(38)

Trading websites should indicate clearly and legibly at the
latest at the beginning of the ordering process whether
any delivery restrictions apply and which means of
payment are accepted.

(39)

It is important to ensure for distance contracts concluded
through websites that the consumer is able to fully read
and understand the main elements of the contract before
placing his order. To that end, provision should be made
in this Directive for those elements to be displayed in the
close vicinity of the confirmation requested for placing
the order. It is also important to ensure that, in such
situations, the consumer is able to determine the
moment at which he assumes the obligation to pay the
trader. Therefore, the consumer’s attention should
specifically be drawn, through an unambiguous formu­
lation, to the fact that placing the order entails the obli­
gation to pay the trader.

(40)

The current varying lengths of the withdrawal periods
both between the Member States and for distance and
off-premises contracts cause legal uncertainty and
compliance costs. The same withdrawal period should
apply to all distance and off-premises contracts. In the
case of service contracts, the withdrawal period should
expire after 14 days from the conclusion of the contract.
In the case of sales contracts, the withdrawal period
should expire after 14 days from the day on which the
consumer or a third party other than the carrier and
indicated by the consumer, acquires physical possession
of the goods. In addition the consumer should be able to
exercise the right to withdraw before acquiring physical
possession of the goods. Where multiple goods are
ordered by the consumer in one order but are
delivered separately, the withdrawal period should

L 304/69

expire after 14 days from the day on which the
consumer acquires physical possession of the last good.
Where goods are delivered in multiple lots or pieces, the
withdrawal period should expire after 14 days from the
day on which the consumer acquires the physical
possession of the last lot or piece.

(41)

In order to ensure legal certainty, it is appropriate that
Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1182/71 of
3 June 1971 determining the rules applicable to
periods, dates and time limits (1) should apply to the
calculation of the periods contained in this Directive.
Therefore, all periods contained in this Directive should
be understood to be expressed in calendar days. Where a
period expressed in days is to be calculated from the
moment at which an event occurs or an action takes
place, the day during which that event occurs or that
action takes place should not be considered as falling
within the period in question.

(42)

The provisions relating to the right of withdrawal should
be without prejudice to the Member States’ laws and
regulations governing the termination or unenforceability
of a contract or the possibility for the consumer to fulfil
his contractual obligations before the time determined in
the contract.

(43)

If the trader has not adequately informed the consumer
prior to the conclusion of a distance or off-premises
contract, the withdrawal period should be extended.
However, in order to ensure legal certainty as regards
the length of the withdrawal period, a 12-month limi­
tation period should be introduced.

(44)

Differences in the ways in which the right of withdrawal
is exercised in the Member States have caused costs for
traders selling cross-border. The introduction of a
harmonised model withdrawal form that the consumer
may use should simplify the withdrawal process and
bring legal certainty. For these reasons, Member States
should refrain from adding any presentational
requirements to the Union-wide model form relating
for example to the font size. However, the consumer
should remain free to withdraw in his own words,
provided that his statement setting out his decision to
withdraw from the contract to the trader is unequivocal.
A letter, a telephone call or returning the goods with a
clear statement could meet this requirement, but the
burden of proof of having withdrawn within the time
limits fixed in the Directive should be on the consumer.
For this reason, it is in the interest of the consumer to
make use of a durable medium when communicating his
withdrawal to the trader.

(1) OJ L 124, 8.6.1971, p. 1.

L 304/70

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(45)

As experience shows that many consumers and traders
prefer to communicate via the trader’s website, there
should be a possibility for the trader to give the
consumer the option of filling in a web-based withdrawal
form. In this case the trader should provide an acknowl­
edgement of receipt for instance by e-mail without delay.

(46)

In the event that the consumer withdraws from the
contract, the trader should reimburse all payments
received from the consumer, including those covering
the expenses borne by the trader to deliver goods to
the consumer. The reimbursement should not be made
by voucher unless the consumer has used vouchers for
the initial transaction or has expressly accepted them. If
the consumer expressly chooses a certain type of delivery
(for instance 24-hour express delivery), although the
trader had offered a common and generally acceptable
type of delivery which would have incurred lower
delivery costs, the consumer should bear the difference
in costs between these two types of delivery.

(47)

should neither apply to goods made to the consumer’s
specifications or which are clearly personalised such as
tailor-made curtains, nor to the supply of fuel, for
example, which is a good, by nature inseparably mixed
with other items after delivery. The granting of a right of
withdrawal to the consumer could also be inappropriate
in the case of certain services where the conclusion of the
contract implies the setting aside of capacity which, if a
right of withdrawal were exercised, the trader may find
difficult to fill. This would for example be the case where
reservations are made at hotels or concerning holiday
cottages or cultural or sporting events.

(50)

On the one hand, the consumer should benefit from his
right of withdrawal even in case he has asked for the
provision of services before the end of the withdrawal
period. On the other hand, if the consumer exercises his
right of withdrawal, the trader should be assured to be
adequately paid for the service he has provided. The
calculation of the proportionate amount should be
based on the price agreed in the contract unless the
consumer demonstrates that that total price is itself
disproportionate, in which case the amount to be paid
shall be calculated on the basis of the market value of the
service provided. The market value should be defined by
comparing the price of an equivalent service performed
by other traders at the time of the conclusion of the
contract. Therefore the consumer should request the
performance of services before the end of the withdrawal
period by making this request expressly and, in the case
of off-premises contracts, on a durable medium.
Similarly, the trader should inform the consumer on a
durable medium of any obligation to pay the propor­
tionate costs for the services already provided. For
contracts having as their object both goods and
services, the rules provided for in this Directive on the
return of goods should apply to the goods aspects and
the compensation regime for services should apply to the
services aspects.

(51)

The main difficulties encountered by consumers and one
of the main sources of disputes with traders concern
delivery of goods, including goods getting lost or
damaged during transport and late or partial delivery.
Therefore it is appropriate to clarify and harmonise the
national rules as to when delivery should occur. The
place and modalities of delivery and the rules concerning
the determination of the conditions for the transfer of
the ownership of the goods and the moment at which
such transfer takes place, should remain subject to
national law and therefore should not be affected by
this Directive. The rules on delivery laid down in this
Directive should include the possibility for the
consumer to allow a third party to acquire on his
behalf the physical possession or control of the goods.
The consumer should be considered to have control of
the goods where he or a third party indicated by the
consumer has access to the goods to use them as an
owner, or the ability to resell the goods (for example,
when he has received the keys or possession of the
ownership documents).

Some consumers exercise their right of withdrawal after
having used the goods to an extent more than necessary
to establish the nature, characteristics and the functioning
of the goods. In this case the consumer should not lose
the right to withdraw but should be liable for any
diminished value of the goods. In order to establish the
nature, characteristics and functioning of the goods, the
consumer should only handle and inspect them in the
same manner as he would be allowed to do in a shop.
For example, the consumer should only try on a garment
and should not be allowed to wear it. Consequently, the
consumer should handle and inspect the goods with due
care during the withdrawal period. The obligations of the
consumer in the event of withdrawal should not
discourage the consumer from exercising his right of
withdrawal.

(48)

The consumer should be required to send back the goods
not later than 14 days after having informed the trader
about his decision to withdraw from the contract. In
situations where the trader or the consumer does not
fulfil the obligations relating to the exercise of the right
of withdrawal, penalties provided for by national legis­
lation in accordance with this Directive should apply as
well as contract law provisions.

(49)

Certain exceptions from the right of withdrawal should
exist, both for distance and off-premises contracts. A
right of withdrawal could be inappropriate for example
given the nature of particular goods or services. That is
the case for example with wine supplied a long time after
the conclusion of a contract of a speculative nature
where the value is dependent on fluctuations in the
market (‘vin en primeur’). The right of withdrawal

22.11.2011

22.11.2011

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

In the context of sales contracts, the delivery of goods
can take place in various ways, either immediately or at a
later date. If the parties have not agreed on a specific
delivery date, the trader should deliver the goods as soon
as possible, but in any event not later than 30 days from
the day of the conclusion of the contract. The rules
regarding late delivery should also take into account
goods to be manufactured or acquired specially for the
consumer which cannot be reused by the trader without
considerable loss. Therefore, a rule which grants an addi­
tional reasonable period of time to the trader in certain
circumstances should be provided for in this Directive.
When the trader has failed to deliver the goods within
the period of time agreed with the consumer, before the
consumer can terminate the contract, the consumer
should call upon the trader to make the delivery within
a reasonable additional period of time and be entitled to
terminate the contract if the trader fails to deliver the
goods even within that additional period of time.
However, this rule should not apply when the trader
has refused to deliver the goods in an unequivocal
statement. Neither should it apply in certain circum­
stances where the delivery period is essential such as,
for example, in the case of a wedding dress which
should be delivered before the wedding. Nor should it
apply in circumstances where the consumer informs the
trader that delivery on a specified date is essential. For
this purpose, the consumer may use the trader’s contact
details given in accordance with this Directive. In these
specific cases, if the trader fails to deliver the goods on
time, the consumer should be entitled to terminate the
contract immediately after the expiry of the delivery
period initially agreed. This Directive should be without
prejudice to national provisions on the way the
consumer should notify the trader of his will to
terminate the contract.

In addition to the consumer’s right to terminate the
contract where the trader has failed to fulfil his obli­
gations to deliver the goods in accordance with this
Directive, the consumer may, in accordance with the
applicable national law, have recourse to other
remedies, such as granting the trader an additional
period of time for delivery, enforcing the performance
of the contract, withholding payment, and seeking
damages.

In accordance with Article 52(3) of Directive
2007/64/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 13 November 2007 on payment services in
the internal market (1), Member States should be able to
prohibit or limit traders’ right to request charges from
consumers taking into account the need to encourage
competition and promote the use of efficient payment
instruments. In any event, traders should be prohibited
from charging consumers fees that exceed the cost borne
by the trader for the use of a certain means of payment.

Where the goods are dispatched by the trader to the
consumer, disputes may arise, in the event of loss or

(1) OJ L 319, 5.12.2007, p. 1.

L 304/71

damage, as to the moment at which the transfer of risk
takes place. Therefore this Directive should provide that
the consumer be protected against any risk of loss of or
damage to the goods occurring before he has acquired
the physical possession of the goods. The consumer
should be protected during a transport arranged or
carried out by the trader, even where the consumer has
chosen a particular delivery method from a range of
options offered by the trader. However, that provision
should not apply to contracts where it is up to the
consumer to take delivery of the goods himself or to
ask a carrier to take delivery. Regarding the moment of
the transfer of the risk, a consumer should be considered
to have acquired the physical possession of the goods
when he has received them.

(56)

Persons or organisations regarded under national law as
having a legitimate interest in protecting consumer
contractual rights should be afforded the right to
initiate proceedings, either before a court or before an
administrative authority which is competent to decide
upon complaints or to initiate appropriate legal
proceedings.

(57)

It is necessary that Member States lay down penalties for
infringements of this Directive and ensure that they are
enforced. The penalties should be effective, proportionate
and dissuasive.

(58)

The consumer should not be deprived of the protection
granted by this Directive. Where the law applicable to the
contract is that of a third country, Regulation (EC)
No 593/2008 should apply, in order to determine
whether the consumer retains the protection granted by
this Directive.

(59)

The Commission, following consultation with the
Member States and stakeholders, should look into the
most appropriate way to ensure that all consumers are
made aware of their rights at the point of sale.

(60)

Since inertia selling, which consists of unsolicited supply
of goods or provision of services to consumers, is
prohibited by Directive 2005/29/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005
concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial
practices in the internal market (‘Unfair Commercial
Practices Directive’) (2) but no contractual remedy is
provided therein, it is necessary to introduce in this
Directive the contractual remedy of exempting the
consumer from the obligation to provide any
consideration for such unsolicited supply or provision.

(2) OJ L 149, 11.6.2005, p. 22.

L 304/72

(61)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

(1 )

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing
of personal data and the protection of privacy in the
electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy
and electronic communications) (1) already regulates
unsolicited communications and provides for a high
level of consumer protection. The corresponding
provisions on the same issue contained in Directive
97/7/EC are therefore not needed.

It is appropriate for the Commission to review this
Directive if some barriers to the internal market are
identified. In its review, the Commission should pay
particular attention to the possibilities granted to
Member States to maintain or introduce specific
national provisions including in certain areas of
Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair
terms in consumer contracts (2) and Directive
1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 25 May 1999 on certain aspects of the sale
of consumer goods and associated guarantees (3). That
review could lead to a Commission proposal to amend
this Directive; that proposal may include amendments to
other consumer protection legislation reflecting the
Commission’s Consumer Policy Strategy commitment
to review the Union acquis in order to achieve a high,
common level of consumer protection.

Directives 93/13/EEC and 1999/44/EC should be
amended to require Member States to inform the
Commission about the adoption of specific national
provisions in certain areas.

22.11.2011

encouraged to draw up, for themselves and in the
interests of the Union, their own tables, which will, as
far as possible, illustrate the correlation between this
Directive and the transposition measures, and to make
them public,

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

CHAPTER I
SUBJECT MATTER, DEFINITIONS AND SCOPE

Article 1
Subject matter
The purpose of this Directive is, through the achievement of a
high level of consumer protection, to contribute to the proper
functioning of the internal market by approximating certain
aspects of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
of the Member States concerning contracts concluded between
consumers and traders.

Article 2
Definitions
For the purpose of this Directive, the following definitions shall
apply:

(1) ‘consumer’ means any natural person who, in contracts
covered by this Directive, is acting for purposes which
are outside his trade, business, craft or profession;

Directives 85/577/EEC and 97/7/EC should be repealed.

Since the objective of this Directive, namely, through the
achievement of a high level of consumer protection, to
contribute to the proper functioning of the internal
market, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member
States and can therefore be better achieved at Union
level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance
with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5
of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the
principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this
Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order
to achieve that objective.

This Directive respects the fundamental rights and
observes the principles recognised in particular by the
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

In accordance with point 34 of the Interinstitutional
agreement on better law-making (4), Member States are

OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37.
(2) OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29.
(3) OJ L 171, 7.7.1999, p. 12.
(4) OJ C 321, 31.12.2003, p. 1.

(2) ‘trader’ means any natural person or any legal person,
irrespective of whether privately or publicly owned, who
is acting, including through any other person acting in his
name or on his behalf, for purposes relating to his trade,
business, craft or profession in relation to contracts
covered by this Directive;

(3) ‘goods’ means any tangible movable items, with the
exception of items sold by way of execution or
otherwise by authority of law; water, gas and electricity
shall be considered as goods within the meaning of this
Directive where they are put up for sale in a limited
volume or a set quantity;

(4) ‘goods made to the consumer’s specifications’ means nonprefabricated goods made on the basis of an individual
choice of or decision by the consumer;

(5) ‘sales contract’ means any contract under which the trader
transfers or undertakes to transfer the ownership of goods
to the consumer and the consumer pays or undertakes to
pay the price thereof, including any contract having as its
object both goods and services;

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(6) ‘service contract’ means any contract other than a sales
contract under which the trader supplies or undertakes
to supply a service to the consumer and the consumer
pays or undertakes to pay the price thereof;
(7) ‘distance contract’ means any contract concluded between
the trader and the consumer under an organised distance
sales or service-provision scheme without the simultaneous
physical presence of the trader and the consumer, with the
exclusive use of one or more means of distance communi­
cation up to and including the time at which the contract
is concluded;
(8) ‘off-premises contract’ means any contract between the
trader and the consumer:
(a) concluded in the simultaneous physical presence of the
trader and the consumer, in a place which is not the
business premises of the trader;
(b) for which an offer was made by the consumer in the
same circumstances as referred to in point (a);
(c) concluded on the business premises of the trader or
through any means of distance communication
immediately after the consumer was personally and
individually addressed in a place which is not the
business premises of the trader in the simultaneous
physical presence of the trader and the consumer; or
(d) concluded during an excursion organised by the trader
with the aim or effect of promoting and selling goods
or services to the consumer;
(9) ‘business premises’ means:
(a) any immovable retail premises where the trader carries
out his activity on a permanent basis; or
(b) any movable retail premises where the trader carries
out his activity on a usual basis;
(10) ‘durable medium’ means any instrument which enables the
consumer or the trader to store information addressed
personally to him in a way accessible for future
reference for a period of time adequate for the purposes
of the information and which allows the unchanged repro­
duction of the information stored;
(11) ‘digital content’ means data which are produced and
supplied in digital form;
(12) ‘financial service’ means any service of a banking, credit,
insurance, personal pension, investment or payment
nature;

L 304/73

(13) ‘public auction’ means a method of sale where goods or
services are offered by the trader to consumers, who
attend or are given the possibility to attend the auction
in person, through a transparent, competitive bidding
procedure run by an auctioneer and where the successful
bidder is bound to purchase the goods or services;

(14) ‘commercial guarantee’ means any undertaking by the
trader or a producer (the guarantor) to the consumer, in
addition to his legal obligation relating to the guarantee of
conformity, to reimburse the price paid or to replace,
repair or service goods in any way if they do not meet
the specifications or any other requirements not related to
conformity set out in the guarantee statement or in the
relevant advertising available at the time of, or before the
conclusion of the contract;

(15) ‘ancillary contract’ means a contract by which the
consumer acquires goods or services related to a distance
contract or an off-premises contract and where those
goods are supplied or those services are provided by the
trader or by a third party on the basis of an arrangement
between that third party and the trader.

Article 3
Scope
1.
This Directive shall apply, under the conditions and to the
extent set out in its provisions, to any contract concluded
between a trader and a consumer. It shall also apply to
contracts for the supply of water, gas, electricity or district
heating, including by public providers, to the extent that these
commodities are provided on a contractual basis.

2.
If any provision of this Directive conflicts with a provision
of another Union act governing specific sectors, the provision of
that other Union act shall prevail and shall apply to those
specific sectors.

3.

This Directive shall not apply to contracts:

(a) for social services, including social housing, childcare and
support of families and persons permanently or
temporarily in need, including long-term care;

(b) for healthcare as defined in point (a) of Article 3 of
Directive 2011/24/EU, whether or not they are provided
via healthcare facilities;

(c) for gambling, which involves wagering a stake with
pecuniary value in games of chance, including lotteries,
casino games and betting transactions;

L 304/74

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(d) for financial services;

(e) for the creation, acquisition or transfer of immovable
property or of rights in immovable property;

(f)

for the construction of new buildings, the substantial
conversion of existing buildings and for rental of accom­
modation for residential purposes;

(g) which fall within the scope of Council Directive
90/314/EEC of 13 June 1990 on package travel, package
holidays and package tours (1);

(h) which fall within the scope of Directive 2008/122/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 January
2009 on the protection of consumers in respect of certain
aspects of timeshare, long-term holiday product, resale and
exchange contracts (2);

(i)

(j)

which, in accordance with the laws of Member States, are
established by a public office-holder who has a statutory
obligation to be independent and impartial and who must
ensure, by providing comprehensive legal information, that
the consumer only concludes the contract on the basis of
careful legal consideration and with knowledge of its legal
scope;

for the supply of foodstuffs, beverages or other goods
intended for current consumption in the household, and
which are physically supplied by a trader on frequent and
regular rounds to the consumer’s home, residence or
workplace;

22.11.2011

5.
This Directive shall not affect national general contract
law such as the rules on the validity, formation or effect of a
contract, in so far as general contract law aspects are not
regulated in this Directive.

6.
This Directive shall not prevent traders from offering
consumers contractual arrangements which go beyond the
protection provided for in this Directive.

Article 4
Level of harmonisation
Member States shall not maintain or introduce, in their national
law, provisions diverging from those laid down in this Directive,
including more or less stringent provisions to ensure a different
level of consumer protection, unless otherwise provided for in
this Directive.

CHAPTER II
CONSUMER INFORMATION FOR CONTRACTS OTHER THAN
DISTANCE OR OFF-PREMISES CONTRACTS

Article 5
Information requirements for contracts other than distance
or off-premises contracts
1.
Before the consumer is bound by a contract other than a
distance or an off-premises contract, or any corresponding offer,
the trader shall provide the consumer with the following
information in a clear and comprehensible manner, if that
information is not already apparent from the context:

(a) the main characteristics of the goods or services, to the
extent appropriate to the medium and to the goods or
services;

(k) for passenger transport services, with the exception of
Article 8(2) and Articles 19 and 22;

(l)

concluded by means of automatic vending machines or
automated commercial premises;

(m) concluded with telecommunications operators through
public payphones for their use or concluded for the use
of one single connection by telephone, Internet or fax
established by a consumer.

4.
Member States may decide not to apply this Directive or
not to maintain or introduce corresponding national provisions
to off-premises contracts for which the payment to be made by
the consumer does not exceed EUR 50. Member States may
define a lower value in their national legislation.
(1) OJ L 158, 23.6.1990, p. 59.
(2) OJ L 33, 3.2.2009, p. 10.

(b) the identity of the trader, such as his trading name, the
geographical address at which he is established and his
telephone number;

(c) the total price of the goods or services inclusive of taxes, or
where the nature of the goods or services is such that the
price cannot reasonably be calculated in advance, the
manner in which the price is to be calculated, as well as,
where applicable, all additional freight, delivery or postal
charges or, where those charges cannot reasonably be
calculated in advance, the fact that such additional charges
may be payable;

(d) where applicable, the arrangements for payment, delivery,
performance, the time by which the trader undertakes to
deliver the goods or to perform the service, and the trader’s
complaint handling policy;

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(e) in addition to a reminder of the existence of a legal
guarantee of conformity for goods, the existence and the
conditions of after-sales services and commercial guarantees,
where applicable;
(f) the duration of the contract, where applicable, or, if the
contract is of indeterminate duration or is to be extended
automatically, the conditions for terminating the contract;
(g) where applicable, the functionality, including applicable
technical protection measures, of digital content;
(h) where applicable, any relevant interoperability of digital
content with hardware and software that the trader is
aware of or can reasonably be expected to have been
aware of.
2.
Paragraph 1 shall also apply to contracts for the supply of
water, gas or electricity, where they are not put up for sale in a
limited volume or set quantity, of district heating or of digital
content which is not supplied on a tangible medium.

(d) if different from the address provided in accordance with
point (c), the geographical address of the place of business
of the trader, and, where applicable, that of the trader on
whose behalf he is acting, where the consumer can address
any complaints;

(e) the total price of the goods or services inclusive of taxes, or
where the nature of the goods or services is such that the
price cannot reasonably be calculated in advance, the
manner in which the price is to be calculated, as well as,
where applicable, all additional freight, delivery or postal
charges and any other costs or, where those charges cannot
reasonably be calculated in advance, the fact that such
additional charges may be payable. In the case of a
contract of indeterminate duration or a contract containing
a subscription, the total price shall include the total costs
per billing period. Where such contracts are charged at a
fixed rate, the total price shall also mean the total monthly
costs. Where the total costs cannot be reasonably calculated
in advance, the manner in which the price is to be
calculated shall be provided;

(f)
3.
Member States shall not be required to apply paragraph 1
to contracts which involve day-to-day transactions and which
are performed immediately at the time of their conclusion.
4.
Member States may adopt or maintain additional precontractual information requirements for contracts to which
this Article applies.

L 304/75

the cost of using the means of distance communication for
the conclusion of the contract where that cost is calculated
other than at the basic rate;

(g) the arrangements for payment, delivery, performance, the
time by which the trader undertakes to deliver the goods or
to perform the services and, where applicable, the trader’s
complaint handling policy;

CHAPTER III
CONSUMER INFORMATION AND RIGHT OF WITHDRAWAL
FOR DISTANCE AND OFF-PREMISES CONTRACTS

Article 6

(h) where a right of withdrawal exists, the conditions, time
limit and procedures for exercising that right in accordance
with Article 11(1), as well as the model withdrawal form
set out in Annex I(B);

Information requirements for distance and off-premises
contracts
1.
Before the consumer is bound by a distance or offpremises contract, or any corresponding offer, the trader shall
provide the consumer with the following information in a clear
and comprehensible manner:
(a) the main characteristics of the goods or services, to the
extent appropriate to the medium and to the goods or
services;
(b) the identity of the trader, such as his trading name;
(c) the geographical address at which the trader is established
and the trader’s telephone number, fax number and e-mail
address, where available, to enable the consumer to contact
the trader quickly and communicate with him efficiently
and, where applicable, the geographical address and
identity of the trader on whose behalf he is acting;

(i)

where applicable, that the consumer will have to bear the
cost of returning the goods in case of withdrawal and, for
distance contracts, if the goods, by their nature, cannot
normally be returned by post, the cost of returning the
goods;

(j)

that, if the consumer exercises the right of withdrawal after
having made a request in accordance with Article 7(3) or
Article 8(8), the consumer shall be liable to pay the trader
reasonable costs in accordance with Article 14(3);

(k) where a right of withdrawal is not provided for in
accordance with Article 16, the information that the
consumer will not benefit from a right of withdrawal or,
where applicable, the circumstances under which the
consumer loses his right of withdrawal;

L 304/76

(l)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

a reminder of the existence of a legal guarantee of
conformity for goods;

(m) where applicable, the existence and the conditions of after
sale customer assistance, after-sales services and commercial
guarantees;

(n) the existence of relevant codes of conduct, as defined in
point (f) of Article 2 of Directive 2005/29/EC, and how
copies of them can be obtained, where applicable;

(o) the duration of the contract, where applicable, or, if the
contract is of indeterminate duration or is to be extended
automatically, the conditions for terminating the contract;

(p) where applicable, the minimum duration of the consumer’s
obligations under the contract;

(q) where applicable, the existence and the conditions of
deposits or other financial guarantees to be paid or
provided by the consumer at the request of the trader;

(r) where applicable, the functionality, including applicable
technical protection measures, of digital content;

(s) where applicable, any relevant interoperability of digital
content with hardware and software that the trader is
aware of or can reasonably be expected to have been
aware of;

(t)

where applicable, the possibility of having recourse to an
out-of-court complaint and redress mechanism, to which
the trader is subject, and the methods for having access to
it.

2.
Paragraph 1 shall also apply to contracts for the supply of
water, gas or electricity, where they are not put up for sale in a
limited volume or set quantity, of district heating or of digital
content which is not supplied on a tangible medium.

22.11.2011

5.
The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall form an
integral part of the distance or off-premises contract and shall
not be altered unless the contracting parties expressly agree
otherwise.

6.
If the trader has not complied with the information
requirements on additional charges or other costs as referred
to in point (e) of paragraph 1, or on the costs of returning the
goods as referred to in point (i) of paragraph 1, the consumer
shall not bear those charges or costs.

7.
Member States may maintain or introduce in their
national law language requirements regarding the contractual
information, so as to ensure that such information is easily
understood by the consumer.

8.
The information requirements laid down in this Directive
are in addition to information requirements contained in
Directive 2006/123/EC and Directive 2000/31/EC and do not
prevent Member States from imposing additional information
requirements in accordance with those Directives.

Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, if a provision of
Directive 2006/123/EC or Directive 2000/31/EC on the content
and the manner in which the information is to be provided
conflicts with a provision of this Directive, the provision of this
Directive shall prevail.

9.
As regards compliance with the information requirements
laid down in this Chapter, the burden of proof shall be on the
trader.

Article 7
Formal requirements for off-premises contracts
1.
With respect to off-premises contracts, the trader shall
give the information provided for in Article 6(1) to the
consumer on paper or, if the consumer agrees, on another
durable medium. That information shall be legible and in
plain, intelligible language.

3.
In the case of a public auction, the information referred to
in points (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 1 may be replaced by the
equivalent details for the auctioneer.

2.
The trader shall provide the consumer with a copy of the
signed contract or the confirmation of the contract on paper or,
if the consumer agrees, on another durable medium, including,
where applicable, the confirmation of the consumer’s prior
express consent and acknowledgement in accordance with
point (m) of Article 16.

4.
The information referred to in points (h), (i) and (j) of
paragraph 1 may be provided by means of the model
instructions on withdrawal set out in Annex I(A). The trader
shall have fulfilled the information requirements laid down in
points (h), (i) and (j) of paragraph 1 if he has supplied these
instructions to the consumer, correctly filled in.

3.
Where a consumer wants the performance of services or
the supply of water, gas or electricity, where they are not put up
for sale in a limited volume or set quantity, or of district heating
to begin during the withdrawal period provided for in
Article 9(2), the trader shall require that the consumer makes
such an express request on a durable medium.

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

4.
With respect to off-premises contracts where the
consumer has explicitly requested the services of the trader
for the purpose of carrying out repairs or maintenance for
which the trader and the consumer immediately perform their
contractual obligations and where the payment to be made by
the consumer does not exceed EUR 200:

(a) the trader shall provide the consumer with the information
referred to in points (b) and (c) of Article 6(1) and
information about the price or the manner in which the
price is to be calculated together with an estimate of the
total price, on paper or, if the consumer agrees, on another
durable medium. The trader shall provide the information
referred to in points (a), (h) and (k) of Article 6(1), but may
choose not to provide it on paper or another durable
medium if the consumer expressly agrees;

(b) the confirmation of the contract provided in accordance
with paragraph 2 of this Article shall contain the
information provided for in Article 6(1).

Member States may decide not to apply this paragraph.

5.
Member States shall not impose any further formal precontractual information requirements for the fulfilment of the
information obligations laid down in this Directive.

Article 8

L 304/77

3.
Trading websites shall indicate clearly and legibly at the
latest at the beginning of the ordering process whether any
delivery restrictions apply and which means of payment are
accepted.

4.
If the contract is concluded through a means of distance
communication which allows limited space or time to display
the information, the trader shall provide, on that particular
means prior to the conclusion of such a contract, at least the
pre-contractual information regarding the main characteristics
of the goods or services, the identity of the trader, the total
price, the right of withdrawal, the duration of the contract and,
if the contract is of indeterminate duration, the conditions for
terminating the contract, as referred to in points (a), (b), (e), (h)
and (o) of Article 6(1). The other information referred to in
Article 6(1) shall be provided by the trader to the consumer
in an appropriate way in accordance with paragraph 1 of this
Article.

5.
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, if the trader makes a
telephone call to the consumer with a view to concluding a
distance contract, he shall, at the beginning of the conversation
with the consumer, disclose his identity and, where applicable,
the identity of the person on whose behalf he makes that call,
and the commercial purpose of the call.

6.
Where a distance contract is to be concluded by
telephone, Member States may provide that the trader has to
confirm the offer to the consumer who is bound only once he
has signed the offer or has sent his written consent. Member
States may also provide that such confirmations have to be
made on a durable medium.

Formal requirements for distance contracts
1.
With respect to distance contracts, the trader shall give the
information provided for in Article 6(1) or make that
information available to the consumer in a way appropriate
to the means of distance communication used in plain and
intelligible language. In so far as that information is provided
on a durable medium, it shall be legible.

7.
The trader shall provide the consumer with the confir­
mation of the contract concluded, on a durable medium
within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the distance
contract, and at the latest at the time of the delivery of the
goods or before the performance of the service begins. That
confirmation shall include:

2.
If a distance contract to be concluded by electronic means
places the consumer under an obligation to pay, the trader shall
make the consumer aware in a clear and prominent manner,
and directly before the consumer places his order, of the
information provided for in points (a), (e), (o) and (p) of
Article 6(1).

(a) all the information referred to in Article 6(1) unless the
trader has already provided that information to the
consumer on a durable medium prior to the conclusion
of the distance contract; and

The trader shall ensure that the consumer, when placing his
order, explicitly acknowledges that the order implies an obli­
gation to pay. If placing an order entails activating a button or a
similar function, the button or similar function shall be labelled
in an easily legible manner only with the words ‘order with
obligation to pay’ or a corresponding unambiguous formulation
indicating that placing the order entails an obligation to pay the
trader. If the trader has not complied with this subparagraph,
the consumer shall not be bound by the contract or order.

(b) where applicable, the confirmation of the consumer’s prior
express consent and acknowledgment in accordance with
point (m) of Article 16.

8.
Where a consumer wants the performance of services, or
the supply of water, gas or electricity, where they are not put up
for sale in a limited volume or set quantity, or of district
heating, to begin during the withdrawal period provided for
in Article 9(2), the trader shall require that the consumer
make an express request.

L 304/78

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

9.
This Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions
on the conclusion of e-contracts and the placing of e-orders set
out in Articles 9 and 11 of Directive 2000/31/EC.
10.
Member States shall not impose any further formal precontractual information requirements for the fulfilment of the
information obligations laid down in this Directive.

22.11.2011

the withdrawal period. Nevertheless, in the case of offpremises contracts, Member States may maintain existing
national legislation prohibiting the trader from collecting the
payment from the consumer during the given period after the
conclusion of the contract.

Article 10
Omission of information on the right of withdrawal

Article 9
Right of withdrawal
1.
Save where the exceptions provided for in Article 16
apply, the consumer shall have a period of 14 days to
withdraw from a distance or off-premises contract, without
giving any reason, and without incurring any costs other than
those provided for in Article 13(2) and Article 14.
2.
Without prejudice to Article 10, the withdrawal period
referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall expire after 14
days from:
(a) in the case of service contracts, the day of the conclusion of
the contract;
(b) in the case of sales contracts, the day on which the
consumer or a third party other than the carrier and
indicated by the consumer acquires physical possession of
the goods or:

1.
If the trader has not provided the consumer with the
information on the right of withdrawal as required by point
(h) of Article 6(1), the withdrawal period shall expire 12
months from the end of the initial withdrawal period, as
determined in accordance with Article 9(2).

2.
If the trader has provided the consumer with the
information provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article within
12 months from the day referred to in Article 9(2), the with­
drawal period shall expire 14 days after the day upon which the
consumer receives that information.

Article 11
Exercise of the right of withdrawal
1.
Before the expiry of the withdrawal period, the consumer
shall inform the trader of his decision to withdraw from the
contract. For this purpose, the consumer may either:

(a) use the model withdrawal form as set out in Annex I(B); or
(i) in the case of multiple goods ordered by the consumer
in one order and delivered separately, the day on which
the consumer or a third party other than the carrier and
indicated by the consumer acquires physical possession
of the last good;
(ii) in the case of delivery of a good consisting of multiple
lots or pieces, the day on which the consumer or a
third party other than the carrier and indicated by the
consumer acquires physical possession of the last lot or
piece;
(iii) in the case of contracts for regular delivery of goods
during defined period of time, the day on which the
consumer or a third party other than the carrier and
indicated by the consumer acquires physical possession
of the first good;

(b) make any other unequivocal statement setting out his
decision to withdraw from the contract.

Member States shall not provide for any formal requirements
applicable to the model withdrawal form other than those set
out in Annex I(B).

2.
The consumer shall have exercised his right of withdrawal
within the withdrawal period referred to in Article 9(2) and
Article 10 if the communication concerning the exercise of
the right of withdrawal is sent by the consumer before that
period has expired.

(c) in the case of contracts for the supply of water, gas or
electricity, where they are not put up for sale in a limited
volume or set quantity, of district heating or of digital
content which is not supplied on a tangible medium, the
day of the conclusion of the contract.

3.
The trader may, in addition to the possibilities referred to
in paragraph 1, give the option to the consumer to elec­
tronically fill in and submit either the model withdrawal form
set out in Annex I(B) or any other unequivocal statement on the
trader’s website. In those cases the trader shall communicate to
the consumer an acknowledgement of receipt of such a with­
drawal on a durable medium without delay.

3.
The Member States shall not prohibit the contracting
parties from performing their contractual obligations during

4.
The burden of proof of exercising the right of withdrawal
in accordance with this Article shall be on the consumer.

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 12
Effects of withdrawal
The exercise of the right of withdrawal shall terminate the
obligations of the parties:

(a) to perform the distance or off-premises contract; or

(b) to conclude the distance or off-premises contract, in cases
where an offer was made by the consumer.

L 304/79

In the case of off-premises contracts where the goods have been
delivered to the consumer’s home at the time of the conclusion
of the contract, the trader shall at his own expense collect the
goods if, by their nature, those goods cannot normally be
returned by post.

2.
The consumer shall only be liable for any diminished
value of the goods resulting from the handling of the goods
other than what is necessary to establish the nature, char­
acteristics and functioning of the goods. The consumer shall
in any event not be liable for diminished value of the goods
where the trader has failed to provide notice of the right of
withdrawal in accordance with point (h) of Article 6(1).

Article 13
Obligations of the trader in the event of withdrawal
1.
The trader shall reimburse all payments received from the
consumer, including, if applicable, the costs of delivery without
undue delay and in any event not later than 14 days from the
day on which he is informed of the consumer’s decision to
withdraw from the contract in accordance with Article 11.

The trader shall carry out the reimbursement referred to in the
first subparagraph using the same means of payment as the
consumer used for the initial transaction, unless the consumer
has expressly agreed otherwise and provided that the consumer
does not incur any fees as a result of such reimbursement.

2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the trader shall not be
required to reimburse the supplementary costs, if the
consumer has expressly opted for a type of delivery other
than the least expensive type of standard delivery offered by
the trader.

3.
Unless the trader has offered to collect the goods himself,
with regard to sales contracts, the trader may withhold the
reimbursement until he has received the goods back, or until
the consumer has supplied evidence of having sent back the
goods, whichever is the earliest.

3.
Where a consumer exercises the right of withdrawal after
having made a request in accordance with Article 7(3) or
Article 8(8), the consumer shall pay to the trader an amount
which is in proportion to what has been provided until the time
the consumer has informed the trader of the exercise of the
right of withdrawal, in comparison with the full coverage of the
contract. The proportionate amount to be paid by the consumer
to the trader shall be calculated on the basis of the total price
agreed in the contract. If the total price is excessive, the propor­
tionate amount shall be calculated on the basis of the market
value of what has been provided.

4.

The consumer shall bear no cost for:

(a) the performance of services or the supply of water, gas or
electricity, where they are not put up for sale in a limited
volume or set quantity, or of district heating, in full or in
part, during the withdrawal period, where:

(i) the trader has failed to provide information in
accordance with points (h) or (j) of Article 6(1); or

(ii) the consumer has not expressly requested performance
to begin during the withdrawal period in accordance
with Article 7(3) and Article 8(8); or

Article 14
Obligations of the consumer in the event of withdrawal
1.
Unless the trader has offered to collect the goods himself,
the consumer shall send back the goods or hand them over to
the trader or to a person authorised by the trader to receive the
goods, without undue delay and in any event not later than 14
days from the day on which he has communicated his decision
to withdraw from the contract to the trader in accordance with
Article 11. The deadline shall be met if the consumer sends
back the goods before the period of 14 days has expired.

The consumer shall only bear the direct cost of returning the
goods unless the trader has agreed to bear them or the trader
failed to inform the consumer that the consumer has to bear
them.

(b) the supply, in full or in part, of digital content which is not
supplied on a tangible medium where:

(i) the consumer has not given his prior express consent
to the beginning of the performance before the end of
the 14-day period referred to in Article 9;

(ii) the consumer has not acknowledged that he loses his
right of withdrawal when giving his consent; or

(iii) the trader has failed to provide confirmation in
accordance with Article 7(2) or Article 8(7).

L 304/80

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

5.
Except as provided for in Article 13(2) and in this Article,
the consumer shall not incur any liability as a consequence of
the exercise of the right of withdrawal.

Article 15
Effects of the exercise of the right of withdrawal on
ancillary contracts
1.
Without prejudice to Article 15 of Directive 2008/48/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April
2008 on credit agreements for consumers (1), if the consumer
exercises his right of withdrawal from a distance or an offpremises contract in accordance with Articles 9 to 14 of this
Directive, any ancillary contracts shall be automatically
terminated, without any costs for the consumer, except as
provided for in Article 13(2) and in Article 14 of this Directive.

2.
The Member States shall lay down detailed rules on the
termination of such contracts.

Article 16
Exceptions from the right of withdrawal

22.11.2011

(g) the supply of alcoholic beverages, the price of which has
been agreed upon at the time of the conclusion of the sales
contract, the delivery of which can only take place after 30
days and the actual value of which is dependent on fluc­
tuations in the market which cannot be controlled by the
trader;

(h) contracts where the consumer has specifically requested a
visit from the trader for the purpose of carrying out urgent
repairs or maintenance. If, on the occasion of such visit, the
trader provides services in addition to those specifically
requested by the consumer or goods other than
replacement parts necessarily used in carrying out the
maintenance or in making the repairs, the right of with­
drawal shall apply to those additional services or goods;

(i)

the supply of sealed audio or sealed video recordings or
sealed computer software which were unsealed after
delivery;

(j)

the supply of a newspaper, periodical or magazine with the
exception of subscription contracts for the supply of such
publications;

Member States shall not provide for the right of withdrawal set
out in Articles 9 to 15 in respect of distance and off-premises
contracts as regards the following:

(k) contracts concluded at a public auction;
(a) service contracts after the service has been fully performed
if the performance has begun with the consumer’s prior
express consent, and with the acknowledgement that he
will lose his right of withdrawal once the contract has
been fully performed by the trader;

(b) the supply of goods or services for which the price is
dependent on fluctuations in the financial market which
cannot be controlled by the trader and which may occur
within the withdrawal period;

(c) the supply of goods made to the consumer’s specifications
or clearly personalised;

(l)

the provision of accommodation other than for residential
purpose, transport of goods, car rental services, catering or
services related to leisure activities if the contract provides
for a specific date or period of performance;

(m) the supply of digital content which is not supplied on a
tangible medium if the performance has begun with the
consumer’s prior express consent and his acknowledgment
that he thereby loses his right of withdrawal.

CHAPTER IV
OTHER CONSUMER RIGHTS

(d) the supply of goods which are liable to deteriorate or
expire rapidly;

Article 17

(e) the supply of sealed goods which are not suitable for return
due to health protection or hygiene reasons and were
unsealed after delivery;

1.
Articles 18 and 20 shall apply to sales contracts. Those
Articles shall not apply to contracts for the supply of water, gas
or electricity, where they are not put up for sale in a limited
volume or set quantity, of district heating or the supply of
digital content which is not supplied on a tangible medium.

(f)

the supply of goods which are, after delivery, according to
their nature, inseparably mixed with other items;

(1) OJ L 133, 22.5.2008, p. 66.

Scope

2.
Articles 19, 21 and 22 shall apply to sales and service
contracts and to contracts for the supply of water, gas, elec­
tricity, district heating or digital content.

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

L 304/81

Article 18

Article 21

Delivery

Communication by telephone

1.
Unless the parties have agreed otherwise on the time of
delivery, the trader shall deliver the goods by transferring the
physical possession or control of the goods to the consumer
without undue delay, but not later than 30 days from the
conclusion of the contract.

Member States shall ensure that where the trader operates a
telephone line for the purpose of contacting him by
telephone in relation to the contract concluded, the consumer,
when contacting the trader is not bound to pay more than the
basic rate.

2.
Where the trader has failed to fulfil his obligation to
deliver the goods at the time agreed upon with the consumer
or within the time limit set out in paragraph 1, the consumer
shall call upon him to make the delivery within an additional
period of time appropriate to the circumstances. If the trader
fails to deliver the goods within that additional period of time,
the consumer shall be entitled to terminate the contract.

The first subparagraph shall not be applicable to sales contracts
where the trader has refused to deliver the goods or where
delivery within the agreed delivery period is essential taking
into account all the circumstances attending the conclusion of
the contract or where the consumer informs the trader, prior to
the conclusion of the contract, that delivery by or on a specified
date is essential. In those cases, if the trader fails to deliver the
goods at the time agreed upon with the consumer or within the
time limit set out in paragraph 1, the consumer shall be entitled
to terminate the contract immediately.

The first subparagraph shall be without prejudice to the right of
telecommunication services providers to charge for such calls.
Article 22
Additional payments
Before the consumer is bound by the contract or offer, the
trader shall seek the express consent of the consumer to any
extra payment in addition to the remuneration agreed upon for
the trader’s main contractual obligation. If the trader has not
obtained the consumer’s express consent but has inferred it by
using default options which the consumer is required to reject
in order to avoid the additional payment, the consumer shall be
entitled to reimbursement of this payment.
CHAPTER V
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 23
Enforcement

3.
Upon termination of the contract, the trader shall, without
undue delay, reimburse all sums paid under the contract.

4.
In addition to the termination of the contract in
accordance with paragraph 2, the consumer may have
recourse to other remedies provided for by national law.

1.
Member States shall ensure that adequate and effective
means exist to ensure compliance with this Directive.
2.
The means referred to in paragraph 1 shall include
provisions whereby one or more of the following bodies, as
determined by national law, may take action under national
law before the courts or before the competent administrative
bodies to ensure that the national provisions transposing this
Directive are applied:

Article 19
Fees for the use of means of payment
Member States shall prohibit traders from charging consumers,
in respect of the use of a given means of payment, fees that
exceed the cost borne by the trader for the use of such means.

Article 20
Passing of risk
In contracts where the trader dispatches the goods to the
consumer, the risk of loss of or damage to the goods shall
pass to the consumer when he or a third party indicated by
the consumer and other than the carrier has acquired the
physical possession of the goods. However, the risk shall pass
to the consumer upon delivery to the carrier if the carrier was
commissioned by the consumer to carry the goods and that
choice was not offered by the trader, without prejudice to the
rights of the consumer against the carrier.

(a) public bodies or their representatives;
(b) consumer organisations having a legitimate interest in
protecting consumers;
(c) professional organisations having a legitimate interest in
acting.
Article 24
Penalties
1.
Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties
applicable to infringements of the national provisions adopted
pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary
to ensure that they are implemented. The penalties provided for
must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

L 304/82

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

2.
Member States shall notify those provisions to the
Commission by 13 December 2013 and shall notify it
without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them.

Article 25

22.11.2011

reference on the occasion of their official publication. Member
States shall determine how such reference is to be made.

2.
The provisions of this Directive shall apply to contracts
concluded after 13 June 2014.

Imperative nature of the Directive
If the law applicable to the contract is the law of a Member
State, consumers may not waive the rights conferred on them
by the national measures transposing this Directive.

Any contractual terms which directly or indirectly waive or
restrict the rights resulting from this Directive shall not be
binding on the consumer.

Article 26
Information
Member States shall take appropriate measures to inform
consumers and traders of the national provisions transposing
this Directive and shall, where appropriate, encourage traders
and code owners as defined in point (g) of Article 2 of Directive
2005/29/EC, to inform consumers of their codes of conduct.

Article 27
Inertia selling
The consumer shall be exempted from the obligation to provide
any consideration in cases of unsolicited supply of goods, water,
gas, electricity, district heating or digital content or unsolicited
provision of services, prohibited by Article 5(5) and point 29 of
Annex I to Directive 2005/29/EC. In such cases, the absence of
a response from the consumer following such an unsolicited
supply or provision shall not constitute consent.

Article 29
Reporting requirements
1.
Where a Member State makes use of any of the regulatory
choices referred to in Article 3(4), Article 6(7), Article 6(8),
Article 7(4), Article 8(6) and Article 9(3), it shall inform the
Commission thereof by 13 December 2013, as well as of any
subsequent changes.

2.
The Commission shall ensure that the information
referred to in paragraph 1 is easily accessible to consumers
and traders, inter alia, on a dedicated website.

3.
The Commission shall forward the information referred to
in paragraph 1 to the other Member States and the European
Parliament. The Commission shall consult stakeholders on that
information.

Article 30
Reporting by the Commission and review
By 13 December 2016, the Commission shall submit a report
on the application of this Directive to the European Parliament
and the Council. That report shall include in particular an
evaluation of the provisions of this Directive regarding digital
content including the right of withdrawal. The report shall be
accompanied, where necessary, by legislative proposals to adapt
this Directive to developments in the field of consumer rights.

Article 28

CHAPTER VI

Transposition

FINAL PROVISIONS

1.
Member States shall adopt and publish, by 13 December
2013, the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
necessary to comply with this Directive. They shall forthwith
communicate to the Commission the text of these measures in
the form of documents. The Commission shall make use of
these documents for the purposes of the report referred to in
Article 30.

Article 31

They shall apply those measures from 13 June 2014.

When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a
reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a

Repeals
Directive 85/577/EEC and Directive 97/7/EC, as amended by
Directive 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 23 September 2002 concerning the distance
marketing of consumer financial services (1) and by Directives
2005/29/EC and 2007/64/EC, are repealed as of 13 June 2014.

References to the repealed Directives shall be construed as
references to this Directive and shall be read in accordance
with the correlation table set out in Annex II.
(1) OJ L 271, 9.10.2002, p. 16.

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 32
Amendment to Directive 93/13/EEC

L 304/83

those provided for in Article 5(1) to (3) and in Article 7(1), it
shall inform the Commission thereof, as well as of any
subsequent changes.

In Directive 93/13/EEC, the following Article is inserted:
‘Article 8a
1.
Where a Member State adopts provisions in accordance
with Article 8, it shall inform the Commission thereof, as
well as of any subsequent changes, in particular where those
provisions:

2.
The Commission shall ensure that the information
referred to in paragraph 1 is easily accessible to consumers
and traders, inter alia, on a dedicated website.

— extend the unfairness assessment to individually
negotiated contractual terms or to the adequacy of the
price or remuneration; or,

3.
The Commission shall forward the information referred
to in paragraph 1 to the other Member States and the
European Parliament. The Commission shall consult stake­
holders on that information.’

— contain lists of contractual terms which shall be
considered as unfair,

Article 34
Entry into force

2.
The Commission shall ensure that the information
referred to in paragraph 1 is easily accessible to consumers
and traders, inter alia, on a dedicated website.

This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following
its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.

3.
The Commission shall forward the information referred
to in paragraph 1 to the other Member States and the
European Parliament. The Commission shall consult stake­
holders on that information.’

Article 35
Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.

Article 33
Amendment to Directive 1999/44/EC

Done at Strasbourg, 25 October 2011.

In Directive 1999/44/EC, the following Article is inserted:
‘Article 8a
Reporting requirements
1.
Where, in accordance with Article 8(2), a Member State
adopts more stringent consumer protection provisions than

For the European Parliament
The President

For the Council
The President

J. BUZEK

M. DOWGIELEWICZ

EN

L 304/84

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX I
Information concerning the exercise of the right of withdrawal
A. Model instructions on withdrawal
Right of withdrawal
You have the right to withdraw from this contract within 14 days without giving any reason.
The withdrawal period will expire after 14 days from the day 1 .
To exercise the right of withdrawal, you must inform us ( 2 ) of your decision to withdraw from this contract by an
unequivocal statement (e.g. a letter sent by post, fax or e-mail). You may use the attached model withdrawal form, but it
is not obligatory. 3
To meet the withdrawal deadline, it is sufficient for you to send your communication concerning your exercise of the
right of withdrawal before the withdrawal period has expired.
Effects of withdrawal
If you withdraw from this contract, we shall reimburse to you all payments received from you, including the costs of
delivery (with the exception of the supplementary costs resulting from your choice of a type of delivery other than the
least expensive type of standard delivery offered by us), without undue delay and in any event not later than 14 days from
the day on which we are informed about your decision to withdraw from this contract. We will carry out such
reimbursement using the same means of payment as you used for the initial transaction, unless you have expressly
agreed otherwise; in any event, you will not incur any fees as a result of such reimbursement. 4
5
6
Instructions for completion:
1. Insert one of the following texts between inverted commas:
(a) in the case of a service contract or a contract for the supply of water, gas or electricity, where they are not put up
for sale in a limited volume or set quantity, of district heating or of digital content which is not supplied on a
tangible medium: ‘of the conclusion of the contract.’;
(b) in the case of a sales contract: ‘on which you acquire, or a third party other than the carrier and indicated by you
acquires, physical possession of the goods.’;
(c) in the case of a contract relating to multiple goods ordered by the consumer in one order and delivered
separately: ‘on which you acquire, or a third party other than the carrier and indicated by you acquires,
physical possession of the last good.’;
(d) in the case of a contract relating to delivery of a good consisting of multiple lots or pieces: ‘on which you acquire,
or a third party other than the carrier and indicated by you acquires, physical possession of the last lot or piece.’;
(e) in the case of a contract for regular delivery of goods during a defined period of time: ‘on which you acquire, or a
third party other than the carrier and indicated by you acquires, physical possession of the first good.’.
2. Insert your name, geographical address and, where available, your telephone number, fax number and e-mail address.
3. If you give the option to the consumer to electronically fill in and submit information about his withdrawal from the
contract on your website, insert the following: ‘You can also electronically fill in and submit the model withdrawal
form or any other unequivocal statement on our website [insert Internet address]. If you use this option, we will
communicate to you an acknowledgement of receipt of such a withdrawal on a durable medium (e.g. by e-mail)
without delay.’.
4. In the case of sales contracts in which you have not offered to collect the goods in the event of withdrawal insert the
following: ‘We may withhold reimbursement until we have received the goods back or you have supplied evidence of
having sent back the goods, whichever is the earliest.’.

22.11.2011

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

5. If the consumer has received goods in connection with the contract:
(a) insert:
— ‘We will collect the goods.’; or,
— ‘You shall send back the goods or hand them over to us or … [insert the name and geographical address,
where applicable, of the person authorised by you to receive the goods], without undue delay and in any
event not later than 14 days from the day on which you communicate your withdrawal from this contract to
us. The deadline is met if you send back the goods before the period of 14 days has expired.’
(b) insert:
— ‘We will bear the cost of returning the goods.’,
— ‘You will have to bear the direct cost of returning the goods.’,
— If, in a distance contract, you do not offer to bear the cost of returning the goods and the goods, by their
nature, cannot normally be returned by post: ‘You will have to bear the direct cost of returning the goods,
… EUR [insert the amount].’; or if the cost of returning the goods cannot reasonably be calculated in advance:
‘You will have to bear the direct cost of returning the goods. The cost is estimated at a maximum of
approximately … EUR [insert the amount].’; or
— If, in an off-premises contract, the goods, by their nature, cannot normally be returned by post and have been
delivered to the consumer’s home at the time of the conclusion of the contract: ‘We will collect the goods at
our own expense.’; and,
(c) insert ‘You are only liable for any diminished value of the goods resulting from the handling other than what is
necessary to establish the nature, characteristics and functioning of the goods.’
6. In the case of a contract for the provision of services or the supply of water, gas or electricity, where they are not put
up for sale in a limited volume or set quantity, or of district heating, insert the following: ‘If you requested to begin
the performance of services or the supply of water/gas/electricity/district heating [delete where inapplicable] during
the withdrawal period, you shall pay us an amount which is in proportion to what has been provided until you have
communicated us your withdrawal from this contract, in comparison with the full coverage of the contract.’.
B. Model withdrawal form
(complete and return this form only if you wish to withdraw from the contract)
— To [here the trader’s name, geographical address and, where available, his fax number and e-mail address are to be
inserted by the trader]:
— I/We (*) hereby give notice that I/We (*) withdraw from my/our (*) contract of sale of the following goods (*)/for the
provision of the following service (*),
— Ordered on (*)/received on (*),
— Name of consumer(s),
— Address of consumer(s),
— Signature of consumer(s) (only if this form is notified on paper),
— Date

(*) Delete as appropriate.

L 304/85

L 304/86

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

22.11.2011

ANNEX II
Correlation table
Directive 85/577/EEC

Directive 97/7/EC

This Directive

Article 3 read in conjunction with
Article 2, points 8 and 9, and
Article 16, point (h)

Article 1

Article 1
Article 2

Article 1 read in conjunction with
Article 2, point 7
Article 2, points 1 and 2

Article 2, point 1

Article 2, point 7

Article 2, point 2

Article 2, point 1

Article 2, point 3

Article 2, point 2

Article 2, point 4, first sentence

Article 2, point 7

Article 2, point 4, second sentence

—

Article 2, point 5

—

Article 3(1)

Article 3(4)

Article 3(2), point (a)

Article 3(3), points (e) and (f)

Article 3(2), point (b)

Article 3(3), point (j)

Article 3(2), point (c)

—

Article 3(2), point (d)

Article 3(3), point (d)

Article 3(2), point (e)

Article 3(3), point (d)

Article 3(3)

—
Article 3(1), first indent

Article 3(3), point (d)

Article 3(1), second indent

Article 3(3), point (l)

Article 3(1), third indent

Article 3(3), point (m)

Article 3(1), fourth indent

Article 3(3), points (e) and (f)

Article 3(1), fifth indent

Article 6(3) and Article 16, point (k)
read in conjunction with Article 2,
point 13

Article 3(2), first indent

Article 3(3), point (j)

Article 3(2), second indent

Article 3(3), point (f) (for rental of
accommodation
for
residential
purposes), point (g) (for package
travel), point (h) (for timeshare), point
(k) (for passenger transport with some
exceptions) and Article 16, point (l)
(exemption from the right of with­
drawal)

Article 4, first sentence

Article 6(1), points (b), (c) and (h), and
Article 7(1) and (2)

Article 4, second sentence

Article 6(1), point a and Article 7(1)

Article 4, third sentence

Article 6(1)

Article 4, fourth sentence

Article 10
Article 4(1), point (a)

Article 6(1), points (b) and (c)

Article 4(1), point (b)

Article 6(1), point (a)

22.11.2011

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Directive 85/577/EEC

L 304/87

Directive 97/7/EC

This Directive

Article 4(1), point (c)

Article 6(1), point (e)

Article 4(1), point (d)

Article 6(1), point (e)

Article 4(1), point (e)

Article 6(1), point (g)

Article 4(1), point (f)

Article 6(1), point (h)

Article 4(1), point (g)

Article 6(1), point (f)

Article 4(1), point (h)

—

Article 4(1), point (i)

Article 6(1), points (o) and (p)

Article 4(2)

Article 6(1) read in conjunction with
Article 8(1), (2) and (4)

Article 4(3)

Article 8(5)

Article 5(1)

Article 8(7)

Article 5(2)

Article 3(3), point m

Article 6(1)

Article 9(1) and (2), Article 10,
Article 13(2), Article 14

Article 6(2)

Article 13 and Article 14(1), second
and third subparagraphs

Article 6(3), first indent

Article 16, point (a)

Article 6(3), second indent

Article 16, point (b)

Article 6(3), third indent

Article 16, point (c) and (d)

Article 6(3), fourth indent

Article 16, point (i)

Article 6(3), fifth indent

Article 16, point (j)

Article 6(3), sixth indent

Article 3(3), point (c)

Article 6(4)

Article 15

Article 7(1)

Article 18(1) (for sales contracts)

Article 7(2)

Article 18(2), (3) and (4)

Article 7(3)

—

Article 8

—

Article 9

Article 27

Article 10

—
(but see Article 13 of Directive
2002/58/EC)

Article 11(1)

Article 23(1)

Article 11(2)

Article 23(2)

Article 11(3), point (a)

Article 6(9) for the burden of proof
concerning pre-contractual
information; for the rest: –

Article 11(3), point (b)

Article 24(1)

Article 11(4)

—

Article 12(1)

Article 25

Article 12(2)

—

Article 13

Article 3(2)

Article 14

Article 4

EN

L 304/88

Official Journal of the European Union

Directive 85/577/EEC

22.11.2011

Directive 97/7/EC

This Directive

Article 15(1)

Article 28(1)

Article 15(2)

Article 28(1)

Article 15(3)

Article 28(1)

Article 15(4)

Article 30

Article 16

Article 26

Article 17

—

Article 18

Article 34

Article 19

Article 35

Article 5(1)

Articles 9 and 11

Article 5(2)

Article 12

Article 6

Article 25

Article 7

Articles 13, 14 and 15

Article 8

Article 4

Annex to Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on cooperation
between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of
consumer protection laws (the Regulation on consumer protection
cooperation) (1)

Paragraphs 2 and 11
(1)

OJ L 364, 9.12.2004, p. 1.

To be construed as a reference to

This Directive

